'The Past we inherit, the Future we build': Lessons from the Durham Miners' Gala
================================================================================

by [Kieran Dodds](https://twitter.com/_kierandodds)

A city's character is both constantly negotiated in the struggle between
its constituent parts, and shaped and re-shaped by its relationship with
local and global economies. As David Harvey has written, cities are
defined by a hierarchy in which ‘local centres \[dominate\] local
hinterlands \[and\] more important metropolitan centres \[dominate\]
lesser centres’ [^post-6-1]. In Durham, this struggle plays out very
much in public. Its city centre metropole draws in daytrippers from
periphery ex-colliery towns at the same time as it grants temporary
visas to Home Counties econ students. Durham City has no collective
accent; it is at once Consett’s Barry Venison and the *Financial Times’*
Sebastian Payne. But to take a train north on the second Saturday of
July is to understand none of this. For the duration of the Durham
Miners’ Gala, the city belongs to those hinterlands, lesser centres,
daytrippers, 200,000 strong this year.

Readers of this journal will likely know the radical traditions of
Durham’s miners as celebrated in their annual show of solidarity. This 8
July saw the 133rd such gathering, brass orchestras supplying theme
songs for folk memories of 1926 intransigence and 1984 defeat – and,
perhaps, hopes of a sort of 21st-century rebirth (of militant politics
at least). To the uninitiated, the Gala must feel daunting and
disorientating, at once ancestral procession and almighty piss-up. To
those for whom the Gala is part of the furniture, it is nonetheless
deeply resonant. Where post-industrial north-eastern communities in the
neoliberal decades have hobbled, at the Gala, they march.

In the context of a continued marginalisation of working class voices
and lives, events like the Durham Miners’ Gala are important. That said,
its popular relevance is surprising. In some marked ways, the fortunes
of the Gala dovetail with that of Corbynism. Once an essential date in
the Labour Party leadership’s calendar, the event was cast as an
irrelevance or, worse, relic during the years of New Labour. Before Ed
Miliband’s symbolic 2012 appearance, no Labour leader had addressed the
Gala in 23 years. (It could be that they were scared off by the
experience of Neil Kinnock. In 1985, Tony Benn writes in his diaries,
‘\[Kinnock\] was so unhelpful to the miners that, when he began
speaking, the bands started up and they marched off’).[^post-6-2]

When Jeremy Corbyn took to the Durham stage during his first Labour
leadership contest in 2015, the Gala’s future was in doubt. The
organisers – Durham Miners’ Association (DMA), an affiliate of the
National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) – finding themselves bereft of
funding turned to an innovative membership model to protect its future.
For a small donation, attendees could become
‘[marras](http://www.friendsofdurhamminersgala.org/marras)’ of the Gala.
Like the Labour Party, where once it depended on generous donors, the
Gala is now funded by friends and supporters. Corbyn’s
[message](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oHFZyYWzl-4) in 2015 meanwhile
could hardly have been more of a departure from the Labour of Yarl’s
Wood and right accommodationism: ‘There is no way forward in blaming
migrants and minorities for our problems; the only way forward is unity
in struggle’. A year on, he returned to give arguably his most
accomplished
[speech](http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/jeremy-corbyn-says-he-is-under-no-pressure-whatsoever-hours-after-angela-eagle-announces-leadership-a7128926.html),
this time during the second contest, drawing on the intellectual force
of Paraguayan former goalkeeper [Jose Luis
Chilavert](https://twitter.com/jeremycorbyn/status/868495765408231424):
&gt; There is no pressure on me, none whatsoever. Real pressure – real
pressure – is when you don't have enough money to feed your kids, when
you don't have a roof over your head, when you are wondering if you are
going to be cared for, when you are wondering how you can survive, you
are wondering how you are going to cope with the debts you have
incurred, you are wondering if your lovely employer is going to give you
a call to give you a couple of hours work or not bother, or change their
mind when you are on the bus on the way to do that job.

Prior to 2017 and his returning to a hero’s welcome, one imagines
panicked, out of practice trumpeters furiously trying to learn the White
Stripes’ *Seven Nation Army* in anticipation of the now famous chant.

That the ‘modernisers’ of New Labour objected to Durham Miners’ Gala is
no surprise, their political project underpinned, as they perceived it,
by a need to adapt [‘traditional Labour Party views, or old-style
socialism’](http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/programmes/newsnight/1988874.stm)
to a transformed world. This misses that the Gala was never about
‘old-style socialism’. Those in Durham who carry their past above their
heads are rather instrumentalising ‘tradition’, their recall serving the
purposes not of nostalgia but, perhaps, ‘modernisation’. The banner of
South Hetton Lodge reads, ‘Lest we forget those who went before us’. One
of many such messages, it is useful to read alongside a famous NUM
injunction oft-repeated at the Gala: ‘The past we inherit, the future we
build’. This is a view of history in keeping with that of Marx and
Engels; that is, ‘history is nothing but the activity of man pursuing
his aims’.[^post-6-3] In this injunction, static heritage is rendered
living history. It is ‘tradition as weapon’, as the Africanist Jan
Vansina put it in a different context.[^post-6-4]

There are lessons to be learned here for the Labour Party. For one, the
Big Meeting represents something of an example of Corbyn’s proposed
‘kinder politics’, which after all ought to incorporate the twin strands
of fellowship and militancy. There is no contradiction in hardness to
authority and kindness to those upon whom authority’s hardness itself
falls. This was a truth instinctively grasped by the late Davey Hopper,
former General Secretary of the DMA, so celebrated by 2017’s speakers
and attendees, and one that permeates the lodge banners, Chopwell and
Follonsby boasting likenesses of Lenin, Marx, Keir Hardie, James
Connolly, and trade union leaders A.J. Cook and George Harvey. The Big
Meeting is, however, in one crucial way an imperfect example of what our
politics should be.. Groups such as Women Against Pit Closures, LGSM,
and this year the WASPI women are integral to the Gala, but its podiums
have historically failed to reflect this diversity.

The much-discussed promise of Corbynism is to marry the parliamentary
and extra-parliamentary left, with a caucus of socialist representatives
in Westminster guided and influenced by a deep network of social
movements and community groups. Surprisingly, given widespread electoral
pessimism and establishment panic around hard left movementism, the
project has been rather more successful in securing seats than it has
mobilising action at the grassroots. As pointed out by Alex Niven in a
perceptive essay on what he cautiously calls the ‘[English
Rustbelt](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2017/07/corbyn-labour-white-workers-deindustrial-north-britain-tories)’,
one partial exception even to this electoral breakthrough has been the
deindustrialised Durham coalfield. By engaging with events such as the
Gala and taking seriously once more its attendees, Corbyn’s Labour can
make good on its promise to put the Party back at the heart of
communities. Constituency parties can learn, for example, from the the
Big Meeting’s [Education4Action](http://www.durhamminers.org/e4a)
initiative, which stages film screenings, hosts public lectures, and
promotes a programme of young and adult political education from its
Redhills base. It may sound trite, but radical social democracy is
radical local democracy.

Niven is right, too, that it is only by *challenging* social
conservatism where it does exist among working class communities –
rather than pandering to the ‘legitimate concerns’ of a ludicrously
ill-defined if not illusory ‘white working class’ – that solidarity can
be built and voters won. Durham Miners’ Gala stands at the interstices
of a sort of labour movement provincialism and the best traditions of
working class internationalism, and it is telling that some on the left
would valorise one and deny the other. Since 2011, Durham speakers have
included Carlos Barrios Contrera and Carlos Bugueno Alfara, two Chilean
survivors of the Copiapó mining collapse; two more striking Asturian
miners; delegations from Venezuela and Cuba; and Gerardo Hernandez and
Rene Gonzalez, two of the unjustly imprisoned Miami Five. The DMA has
also supported the delivery of ambulances to Cuba and during apartheid
stood side-by-side with black South African mineworkers, some of whom
were invited to spend time in the homes of their Durham counterparts.
Just as the close of Corbyn’s 2017 speech imploring government action in
response to the refugee crisis was met with applause, so did ordinary
attendees take an enthusiastic interest in international struggles and
donate to far-off solidarity funds.

In recent years, and especially post-Brexit, a rival internationalism
has come to overshadow its left variant and near-monopolise the concept,
its definition capital flow rather than solidarity. From his jollies at
Durham Miners’ Gala in 2015, for example, the FT’s aforementioned
Sebastian Payne
[tweeted](https://twitter.com/SebastianEPayne/status/751769949492875270),
‘Representative of Cuban mineworkers urges crowd to "think beyond
borders" after attacking NAFTA and free trade agreements’. Commentariat
comrade John Rentoul meanwhile
[sneered](https://twitter.com/JohnRentoul/status/862608746069065729) at
Labour’s 2017 manifesto commitment to responsible supply chains in the
Global South, assuming potential working class Labour voters unable to
comprehend evidently necessary concepts like environmental
sustainability. This is not in fact internationalism at all, but Boris
Johnson’s self-described ‘[liberal
cosmopolitanism](http://www.voteleavetakecontrol.org/boris_johnson_the_liberal_cosmopolitan_case_to_vote_leave.html)’.
It is the logic of the ‘[Barista
Visa](http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2017/04/17/amber-rudd-considering-barista-visa-allow-eu-migrants-come-work/)’.
Indeed, it requires a defence of ‘cosmopolitics’ against the
cosmopolitans, confronting the myth that working class people are
unwilling to ‘think beyond borders’ and encouraging political
communication rooted in the connectedness of struggles. [Nadine
El-Enany](https://www.versobooks.com/blogs/3306-the-colonial-logic-of-grenfell)
is right that the recent Grenfell atrocity must be seen in its correct
context of coloniality and state racism, but it recalls also a feature
of 19th and 20th century pit disasters: namely, elite complicity in the
deaths of the oppressed.

Corbyn has
[described](http://www.itv.com/news/tyne-tees/2017-07-08/corbyn-gala-europes-biggest-demonstration-of-working-class-culture/)
Durham Miners’ Gala as ‘Europe’s biggest demonstration of working class
culture’. While this might be true, it is useful only because ‘culture’
is leveraged in the same way as the pit banners leverage working class
history. Without a recognition that its culture cannot but be linked to
class, and a resolve to construct from that culture a moral, outward
politics, Durham on Gala day would exist as a kind of enlarged Beamish
Museum, more artefact than ‘weapon’. In Stuart Hall’s memorable turn of
phrase, ‘\[Popular culture\] is not a sphere where socialism, a
socialist culture – already fully formed – might be simply “expressed”.
But it is one of the places where socialism might be constituted. That
is why “popular culture” matters. Otherwise, to tell you the truth, I
don't give a damn about it.’ [^post-6-5] If we in Labour are serious
about reaffirming solidarity as that which underpins our project, the
Big Meeting ought to be held up not as idle reminiscence, but as an
exercise in future-building.

[^post-6-1]: David Harvey, *Social Justice and the City*, London: Edward
    Arnold, 1979, p.262.

[^post-6-2]: Tony Benn (ed. Ruth Winstone), *A Blaze of Autumn Sunshine:
    The Last Diaries*, London: Arrow Books, 2013, p.150.

[^post-6-3]: Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, *The Holy Family or Critique
    of Critical Critique*, trans. Richard Dixon, Moscow: Foreign
    Languages Publishing House, 1956, p.125.

[^post-6-4]: Jan Vansina, *Oral Tradition as History*, Oxford: James
    Currey, 1985, p.102.

[^post-6-5]: Stuart Hall, ‘Notes on Deconstructing “The Popular”’, in
    Raphael Samuel (ed.), *People’s History and Socialist Theory*
    (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1981), pp.227-240, at p.239.
