Barely managing: on what’s missing from left political economy
==============================================================

by [Sahil Dutta](https://twitter.com/sahildutta) and [Paul
Gilbert](https://twitter.com/paulrgilbert)

There’s a difference between policies and power. If a left-wing party
wants to turn its manifesto promises into political practice it needs to
construct the capacity to do so. The gap between a minister’s policy
aspiration and the lived reality of a worker or service user is vast,
and composed of a chain of different institutions, expertise and
personnel. This gap corrupts the democratic ideal that elected
politicians make policies, while civil servants merely carry them out.

Connecting these disparate parts of the British state are not the
Machiavellian scheming of Yes Minster bureaucrats. Instead, it’s the
managerial reforms that sought to rationalise the state bureaucracy that
must be challenged. It’s here, in what Christopher Hood called the tools
of New Public Management (NPM), that neoliberalism is deeply encoded.

These techniques, used to design, cost and evaluate state action are so
embedded in state administration, that it’s perhaps no surprise that the
Labour Party’s own briefing on ‘Alternative Models of Ownership’ says so
little about alternative, democratic forms of management. While it
(rightly) highlights the importance of ‘democratising’ ownership, it
depicts management as a simple corollary of ownership. Here, the very
real ills which beset privatised services and infrastructure are simply
laid at the door of privatisation.

But reversing decades of privatisation will not produce the return of a
mythic “public service ethos”. Reforming ownership is not enough, for a
Left political economy to succeed, managerialism must matter too. 

Reform of the state’s managerial tools would mount not only a direct
challenge to the status quo, but also to the inheritance of New Labour.
The last Labour government did not substantially transform inequities of
power in the private economy. Its most significant legacy was instead a
restless innovation in public governance that saw quangos, consultants
and managerial specialists become ever more central to the design and
delivery of the public sector. 

In doing so New Labour ramped up a trend for centralising state control
that began with Edward Heath and grew under Margaret Thatcher. The
success of the New Right assault on the collective sectors during the
1980s, that is now often associated with fiscal retrenchment, depended,
in fact, on government constructing the capacity to force through its
changes at an administrative level.

Thatcher’s government especially worked on substituting the autonomy of
professions whose authority and expertise could resist their programme
of change - teachers, doctors, civil servants, social workers, local
government - for control at a distance by a thickened clot of managers.
As Michael Heseltine, then secretary of state for the environment, put
it a year after Thatcher took power: “The management ethos must run
right through our national life - private and public companies, civil
service, nationalised industries, local government, the National Health
Service”.

But Thatcher didn’t simply oversee the development of an increasingly
centrally managed state. The specific techniques that made this
‘neoliberal’ revolution possible matter. And key to this struggle was
the development of NPM: a regime of governance where private sector
values of efficiency and cost-saving are forced into public sector
organisations. Its advocates hoped that by driving ‘private sector
values’ into the public sector, NPM would ramp up efficiency. Critics
warned that valorising efficiency was nothing more than a
pseudo-intellectual justification for cutting costs, and would
inevitably mean slashing the crucial services that many relied on. In
the end, NPM delivered the worst of both: More cuts and higher costs.

Years of successive reforms saw public sector costs spiral. State
spending on quangos quadrupled from 1980-2010 to over £40 billion in
real terms. This was part of a trend that saw the administrative costs
of UK civil departments rise by 50% over Thatcher’s time in office and
substantially again under Blair. By 2010, the administrative cost of
running the British state neared £30 billion a year (excluding military
spending), proof that whatever the supporters promised and critics
feared, NPM did the very opposite of ‘slashing the state’.  But
straightforwardly criticising NPM for failing to deliver on its promise
of ‘a government that works better and costs less’, risks overlooking a
more significant legacy: the transformation of the exercise of political
economic power in the public sector.

In academies and free schools, foundation trust hospitals, outsourced
services, quango-run utilities, or the flourishing of targets and audit
culture, NPM has transformed government. Put simply, the managerial
state now lacks the capacity to democratically run public services, even
the ones it owns.  To be clear, we’re not suggesting that vital public
services and infrastructure should be privately owned. The manifesto
proposals to bring private rail companies back into public ownership,
and replace our ‘dysfunctional’ water system with a network of
regionally-owned water companies are well made. These utilities ‘taken
out of democratic control’ through privatisation have cost members of
the public – and the state – more, while rewarding private owners
handsomely.

In these cases, ownership itself (and the compulsion to appease
rapacious shareholders) is a key problem to which Labour needs to
provide a solution. Similarly, there is no doubt that any hope of a
rebalanced political economy needs greater infrastructure investment.
But re-nationalisation of – or increased public investment in –
infrastructure is only the beginning, and privileging ownership reforms
as a way out of neoliberalism is not enough to challenge entrenched NPM
techniques.

How should the corrosive effects of NPM be tackled then? In identifying
private market relations as the core of a regressive political economy,
critics of NPM see a solution in either rejecting the private sector
“ethos” or injecting “democratic principles” into the organisation of
the public sector. But viewing headteachers, chief executives and
vice-chancellors as if they dreamed of one-day realising large executive
compensation packages linked to the ‘share value’ of their virtual
corporations is itself misleading.

Leaving aside the constant increase in private concessions and
subcontractors across the public sector, this is not the case. There are
no shareholders, no dividends, no impatient financiers demanding
short-term gains to their ‘shareholder value’. Managers in public
services do not manage ‘as if’ their institutions were private,
shareholder-owned entities merely because some agents of the state want
to privatise them.

It is not the supposed ‘market principles’ that make tools of NPM
damaging for a Left political economy, it is the tools themselves.
Critics too easily collapse these into the triumph of so-called
free-market fundamentalism associated with Hayek and Friedman. Yet the
focus on targets, cost-benefit analysis, outsourcing and audit culture
stems from a very different intellectual lineage to that of neoliberal
theory. It is the RAND institute and the likes of Robert McNamara and
Alain Enthoven who have been central to the development of contemporary
public sector managerial knowledge, not the Mont Pelerin Society.

In contemporary Britain, the reproduction of NPM has become an end in
itself in the public sector. Consider the list of training courses
recently made available to senior academics and professional services
staff at a large, research-intensive university in the Midlands:
‘Essential guide to managing at the university’; ‘Management
communication’; ‘Management for efficiency and effectiveness’; ‘Managing
performance’; ‘Managing projects in the organisation’; and the
malignantly tautological ‘Understanding the management role to improve
management performance.’

The entrenchment of a well-remunerated cadre empowered to manage – to
evaluate, compensate and castigate performance according to a set of
quantified criteria – becomes a self-referential and recursive process.
As the organisational reforms fail to bring about the promised
efficiency gains, managers (supported by highly-paid consultants)
introduce further change, utilising an expanded set of increasingly
tendentious quantifications in order to asymptotically capture
organisational processes and roles. And then, more often than not, they
move on, to ‘manage change’ elsewhere.

As Will Davies has noted, in contrast to the Left's concerted push for
new approaches to economics, there has been a frustrating silence to
date around the possibility of new Left approaches to management. The
best of the current academic works are rightly critical, berating
managers for excluding slaveholding, colonial expansion and other forms
of ‘necrocapitalism’ from conventional histories of management. There
are also numerous Foucauldian warnings about the dangers of ‘governing
by numbers’, but this is not enough.

Similarly, the ambition of Left management must become something richer
than prioritising stakeholder voice or labour representation on
corporate boards. The challenge is to develop alternative techniques
that allow for democratic accountability of public service professionals
in such a way that prevents empowering distant technocrats as the
ultimate arbiters of correct practice. This is no call to simply turn
NPM red. Current managerial techniques have a neoliberal trajectory
inscribed in their history.

Instead workers could take the lead challenging existing frameworks of
accountability in their sectors. What is to stop nurses themselves
partnering with Unison to create a fairer system of appraisal of their
expertise for example?  A return to the pre-NPM autonomy of civil
servants and the professions is neither viable nor particularly
desirable, given the class politics from which professional autonomy
once drew its legitimacy. Moreover, in a left political economy
organised around democratic ownership, there will still be management
failure. No perfect ‘process’ can ever be developed to deliver perfect
outcomes. Yet change remains necessary and neither a continuation of NPM
nor an ‘anti-neoliberal ethos’ will suffice.
