Reclaiming Common Sense
=======================

by [James Trafford](https://twitter.com/james_trafford)

Arguably, we are at a critical sociohistorical juncture. The neoliberal
conjugation of progressive liberalism with marketization is giving way
to mutations that include both new forms of ethnonationalism, and new
forms of socialism. Here, common sense has emerged as a central site of
political contention and antagonism, with attempts to shut-down
political possibility with “magic money trees” giving way to majority
support to requisition local housing for victims of the Grenfell Tower
atrocity, and Clive Lewis proclaiming that we should “burn
neoliberalism, not people”. In an era that has often been characterized
by the most hegemonic forms of neoliberal common sense in the
sociopolitical formation governed by perpetual austerity, it seems that
the ground is finally beginning to shift.

Of course, recent political and media responses to these shifts have
largely operated as consensus defence mechanisms. Here, we witness still
the upholding of neoliberal common sense that “austerity is not a
political choice, but a financial necessity” against Jeremy Corbyn’s
arguments to the contrary [^post-4-1]. And, expressions of popular
democracy are doubly reprimanded – on the one hand for their supposed
xenophobia and ethnonationalism – and for their utopian socialist
imagination on the other. The sneering dismissal of the “racist working
classes”, for example, enables us to see the ways in which political
possibility is defined by what is taken to be empirical, or acceptable,
whilst also employing sanctioning practices that aim to further embed
and entrench that acceptability. The scope of the domain of the
empirical, here, is typically limited to so-called moderate and centre
viewpoints, which supposedly result from non-partisan and
non-ideological managerial and pacificatory consensus, as determining
the *reality* of both neoliberal socioeconomic formations, and political
practice itself (as discussed by
[Williams](https://newsocialist.org.uk/fantasy-politics/)). But, the
increasingly obvious failure of this common sense over recent months is
indicative of both the lie in which neoliberal centrism pretends to
consensus and neutrality, and the reality of the massive-scale
engineering project that it has required to maintain its hegemonic
status through New Labourism to Austerity-Toryism and beyond.

Common Sense Neoliberalism
--------------------------

In *Common Sense Neoliberalism*, Stuart Hall and Alan O’Shea discuss the
ways in which media appeals to common sense are employed as a
legitimation strategy that secures political standpoints [^post-4-2]. As
they point out, the invocation of common sense is not simply an attempt
to excavate popular opinion, but rather it also hopes to shape that
opinion through the presumption that it is already shared. It is in this
domain of common sense, therefore, that central political battles are to
be fought. There are at least two dimensions to the way we can
understand common sense in this context: the first being found “in the
wild” so to speak, and the second, the discursively construed (and often
constructed) mediatised appeals to common sense. It would be simple to
think that it is a fissure between the two that has opened-up over
recent months, where the political commentariat is simply out of touch
with “real” common sense. But this would fail to grasp the mechanisms by
which common sense operates, particularly regarding the way in which
both forms are shaped by power, and potentially leads to the reified
abuse of opinion polls, and the dangerous idea that a “new common sense”
has already been reached.

As such, accounting for common sense is somewhat tricky, since its
sedimentation and construction occurs at the level, not of discursive
rules, but of assumptions, habits, and dispositions. Commonsense is not
the sort of thing that can be discursively elaborated, being composed of
attitudes that are open-ended, differential responses to each other and
to contexts, emotions, and embodied actions. But, since this social
background of norms shapes the meanings within which our lives are
formed, it is also the central site in which our local interactions and
contexts are tied to broader structures, practices, and sanctions. So,
whilst neoliberal commonsense is *deployed* as a set of social
constraints and configurations as if they are simply factual, it is more
typically ingrained as sets of material practices. As Wendy Brown
argues, with the neoliberal rise of competitive individualism,
inequality becomes the norm, where we are at ongoing risk of failure,
redundancy, and precarity, even concerning basic needs of food and
shelter, whilst often not questioning our individual responsibility for
these inequalities [^post-4-3]. In this context, common sense
neoliberalism is often not visible at the level of discourse, but is
grasped through its material and normative effects, many of which
operate in the register of affect, mental health, and a permanent state
of anxiety [^post-4-4]. As Ellie Mae O’Hagan put it, after speaking with
employees of a recently bought-out carpet factory in Blackpool, “not one
has said neoliberalism but that’s the system they’re describing and they
know full well what it is because they’re living it" [^post-4-5].

It is on this terrain in which common sense is continuously formed and
reformed, as part-and-parcel with the material and embodied practices of
our lives, where these are sculpted by the specific socioeconomic
conditions in which we are inextricably located. It is also for this
reason that common sense can neither be disparaged as misguided or
intrinsically conservative, nor can it be upheld as a single monolithic
and static “reality” outside of the conditions of power in which it is
sculpted.

Neoliberalism, on this sort of story, cannot be adequately approached as
if imposed as an ideological set of principles, but neither can it be
fully captured in its objective and infrastructural forms – it is
neither merely discursive nor merely material-determinative. Rather, the
power of neoliberalism is that it is a massive-scale, and complex,
engineering project, which has required multiple mutations over time,
and constant reinforcement at all levels – from common sense to economic
policy; from higher-education timetabling systems to detention-centres.
This is largely not the result of an imposed, and top-down strategy, but
rather of the constitution of a landscape of objective conditions in
which the various incarnations of neoliberalism become more possible
than others [^post-4-6]. In this way, this hegemonic neoliberalism has
made and remade institutions and human subjects. Moreover, whilst
coercion has been necessary, such as the carceral state in the UK and
US, military intervention across the Middle East, confrontations between
government and trade unions, and between police and protest movements
and “riots”; on the whole, forceful sanctions are at the periphery of a
largely coherent hegemonic project across social, political, economic,
and cultural domains. Neoliberalism, then, in its current form captures
a loose, complex set of mechanisms, practices, and norms, combining
centrist governance with neoliberal managerialism and occluded state
intervention in forging competition, which, taken together, would likely
be disavowed by many of those espousing some of the norms upholding it.

So, neoliberal centrism can be understood to operate through forms of
capillary power, as Foucault put it [^post-4-7], which doesn’t require
our assent, but is better considered in terms of the ways in which
material and normative practices are shaped by a landscape of power that
“consists in guiding the possibility of conduct” [^post-4-8]. Where
neoliberal centrism emphasises consensus and equilibrium, the resultant
entrenching of a local set of norms as setting the horizon for political
discourse is always the result of complex processes producing relatively
stable social forms through mostly harmonious interaction and
conglomerate pressure. As such, it is necessary to consider the complex,
and often non-discursive, ways in which commonsense is shaped,
mobilized, and revised by considering the intersections of material and
technical systems with social norms. For example, explicit *appeals* to
common sense, to “hard-working families” or austerity as “tightening our
belts” can be understood as part of more general frameworks of political
articulation and power, which attempt to engineer our social norms and
dispositions by imposing pressure to act along certain trajectories, and
actualizing tendencies towards conservative social positions – in this
sense, discourse has complex causal powers.

These sorts of appeals use explicit discourse to shape and embed the
stability of social norms in the form of common sense, and thereby to
sculpt the material practices and institutional forms in which it is
expressed. In other words, our interests and meanings are never just
“found” in common sense, as if making an invisible ideology visible, but
neither are they simply imposed upon it. Rather, the consolidation of a
specific alignment of interests from what is a loose and complex
dispositional field, often involves the active reconstruction of those
interests at the level of political discourse. Think of the processes by
which, for example, the “benefit cheat” becomes seen as the enemy of the
“hardworking family”, through the articulation of stereotypes across
varying media, political articulation of our interests along this axis,
and so on. Appeals to common sense are part of much wider processes
requiring already entrenched meanings regarding, in this case,
individual competitiveness, work, gender, and nationhood. These
interests are then used to underpin substantial socio-political and
material effects, looped into institutions and practices that serve to
enact and enforce policy decisions, which then feed-back into media to
further embed those social norms as if reality.

Reclaiming Common Sense; Resculpting Power
------------------------------------------

It is unsurprising, in this context, to find that there have been
substantive attempts to maintain these systems of power (often by
progressive liberals) in recent calls for the re-education of the young,
in drawing attention to the supposed stupidity of the “common people”,
and the mass moral condemnation of the supposedly racist working
classes. There, the suggestion is that the people may not know what is
best for them, and that governance requires institutionalized forms of
rational expertise to ward off the “irrational crowd”. As such, the
current crisis of common sense is understood as a problem of
irrationality that can be put down to the simplistic viewpoints of those
rooted in specific contexts that are incapable of gaining traction upon
the complexity of neoliberal economics, society, and political
decisions. It is of absolute import, that a left approach to common
sense does not operate along similar lines, adopting (as it often has) a
paternalistic advocation of “good sense” in critique of a duped working
class. But, paradoxically perhaps, this sort of left paternalism exists
alongside a tendency on the left to avoid looking like we are engaged in
anything that could appear to be the manipulation of common sense. It is
equally important that we do not shy away from the necessity to actively
re-engineer common sense, to forge progressive practices, and to shift
the current balance of power.

In distinction to these prior tendencies on the left, it seems that the
conditions of the possibility for building new common senses cannot be
rooted in ideology critique, or leftist intellectualism. Rather, they
must be rooted in an experience of the effects and consequences of
neoliberalism as a state of affairs, and material practices – in
objective imbalances of power across the social landscape.
Re-engineering common sense on the left is, therefore, part-and-parcel
with building new social practices and forms. And, it is precisely here
that we are already witnessing the re-articulation of common sense
through the alignment of interests across new forms of social groupings
that are far looser, and overlapping, than is suggested by both economic
Marxism, and post-Marxist populism. These processes involve the
construction of new ideological alignments, where these are operating
beyond, and across, the fault-lines of class that have been
traditionally identified by left movements. Any *re-articulation* of
neoliberal socio-political forms will involve the construction of
political alignments that work together to build shared interests,
commitments, and meanings – we cannot deal with structural power by
simply speaking from where we are situated in order that “we” are
recognized. Rather, we need to actively construct social groups and
standpoints that are always subject to current formations of structural
power, even as they seek to uncover their conditions and transform them.
Such alignments endeavor to coalesce common sense in a unity without
unification, in order to construct and forge new norms, connections, and
configurations of the social world [^post-4-9].

So, this project of re-engineering common sense could not be simply a
top-down campaign, but rather will need to involve the articulation of
already existing dispositions and the construction of new spaces for
social organisation. This is also to engage our desires, and to
actualise these desires along the lines of progressive political forms
of collective optimism and hope, as well as anger. For example, it is,
to my mind, imperative that we do not give in to a regressive
articulation of affect around freedom of movement and nationalism of the
sort advocated by Blue Labour – that falls into a trap “implying that
migration causes unhappiness by forcing people who are ‘unalike’ to live
together”, as Sara Ahmed put it [^post-4-10]. Rather, we should continue
to build new articulations of these feelings towards solidarity across
workers, putting those who suffer most from the violence of the state
and current common sense at the forefront. This is to actualise existing
feelings, and experiences of the consequences of neoliberal
decision-making, into political alignments that are neither determined
by opposition to those conditions, nor concretise those emotions in a
praxis of immediate and affective action. This also requires us to pay
attention to the strategic reconstruction of our institutions and
material processes to better scaffold and stabilize new norms, and
practices. So, for example, we need to consider how to institutionalise
more progressive social formations so that they can be scaled up, and
used as platforms for further action.

As such, the project of re-engineering required to build new forms of
power and common sense would be impossible without engaging with a broad
and deep set of democratic activities. This is to absolutely refute the
idea that the new forms of democratic action that we are witnessing from
Momentum to Black Lives Matter are, in fact, anti-democratic attempts at
incursion upon politics proper. Equally, we need to actively reconceive
our democratic institutions, and to build new ones, which reach into our
everyday lived realities. This requires that, on the left, we have
conversations about collective rationality and reasoning together. For
example, we need to ensure that our democratic practices both include
those voices that have so often been excluded, and also involve
practices and expressions that have been routinely discounted as
“irrational”, “unreasonable”, or “emotional” (see also
[Marie](https://newsocialist.org.uk/a-million-member-party-part-one/)).

In this regard, the left, as much as anywhere else, needs to face-up to
its implication in structural neoliberalism, and to actively attempt to
undo it in every setting. It is a well-trodden reality that systems of
oppression tend to work their way back in to organisations on the left.
This has often been dealt with by an emphasis on consensus, which
occludes the dynamics of power and exclusion that operates in
face-to-face decision making, and is frequently coupled with the
obviation of organisation and hierarchy, which leads to a [tyranny of
structurelessness](http://struggle.ws/pdfs/tyranny.pdf), entrenching
those forms of power. Instead, radically democratic processes should not
be considered absent of power, but rather to work within, and on, a
landscape of power in order to reshape it towards local and generic
structural justices. So, rather than think of democratic reasoning as
just the joint assessment and comparison of claims made by individuals
on a supposedly equal footing, we should consider the ways in which we
collectively construct and articulate claims, reasons, and norms in
these situations. This will require us to consider how those situations
are already structured, along the lines of a landscape distributed with
dispositions, habits, resources, limitations, and where our capacity to
re-articulate that landscape will also depend upon our positions within
it. Making this landscape visible, so refusing to allow those local sets
of norms to become the horizon for discourse within our social groups
and institutions, and working to revise them, is therefore integral to
our democratic activity.

In light of this, and since the contemporary left intersects across
several social settings and material structures, a new socialist
movement may be understood as attempting to actualise and alter our
dispositions and capacities to act along certain trajectories: as a
collective direction of travel, rather than a unified set of beliefs.
This is to shape, together, new forms of common sense in ways that we
are already seeing – resculpting political possibility by beginning to
make claims and positions seem more possible than others, building
towards new forms of collective activity that move beyond neoliberal
acceptability, and creating new social “realities”. Much is yet to be
done, but these alignments are already beginning to pool together as a
complex and emergent movement, in which the domain of politics is not
limited to Westminster, but is concerned with transformation across all
of our forms of life, for the better.

[^post-4-1]: Martin Daubney on Sky Sunrise, 28th June 2017 at 8.40am.

[^post-4-2]: Stuart Hall and Alan O’Shea (2013). “Common-sense
    neoliberalism”. *Soundings* 55: Values as commodities.

[^post-4-3]: Wendy Brown (2015). *Undoing the Demos*. MIT Press.

[^post-4-4]: See Mark Fisher’s excellent discussion of these effects in
    e.g. his (2009), *Capitalist Realism: Is there no alternative?*.
    Zero Books.

[^post-4-5]: @MissEllieMae, July 21st (2017), 5.06am.

[^post-4-6]: See Alex Williams (2015), “Complexity & Hegemony: Technical
    Politics in an Age of Uncertainty.” University of East London.
    http://roar.uel.ac.uk/4773/.

[^post-4-7]: Michel Foucault (1980). *Power/Knowledge: Selected
    Interviews and Other Writings, 1972-1977*. Pantheon.

[^post-4-8]: Michel Foucault (1982). “The Subject and Power.” *Critical
    Inquiry* 8 (4): 777–795, p.789.

[^post-4-9]: On political articulation, see Stuart Hall (1985).
    “Signification, Representation, Ideology: Althusser and the
    Post‐structuralist Debates.” *Critical Studies in Media
    Communication*, 2 (2): 91–114. This understanding of articulation
    differs from the one given by Laclau and Mouffe since,
    re-articulation does not invoke a populist “we” whose identity is
    formed in opposition to the exclusionary power of liberal democracy,
    but rather invokes a complex, and intersecting set of social
    formations. See Laclau, Ernesto, and Chantal Mouffe (1985).
    *Hegemony and Socialist Strategy: Towards a Radical Democratic
    Politics*. Verso Books.

[^post-4-10]: Sara Ahmed (2008). The Politics of Good
    Feeling. *Australasian Journal of Critical Race and Whiteness
    Studies*, 4(1).
