The Comedification of Politics; The Politicisation of Comedy
============================================================

by Willow Lloyd

In tandem with a growing distrust in politicians and journalists, the
public sphere in the US and the UK is becoming increasingly comedified.
Comedic bits taking on social and political questions of import – like
Stewart Lee’s demolition of Paul Nuttall, excerpted from his BBC show
Stewart Lee’s *Comedy Vehicle* – are cut out, uploaded, tweeted and
retweeted.

Socialism is not simply about new economic relations, but about creating
a whole new culture with new ways of feeling. Moreover, political
motivation involves a great deal more than a simple deduction from class
location and economic conditions. For as Theweleit wrote, ‘\[t\]he
success of fascism demonstrates that masses who become fascist suffer
more from their internal states of being than from hunger or
unemployment.’ Therefore, in the struggle for hegemony nothing should be
left aside: the left must use the whole arsenal of art, feeling, and
sensuousness in struggle. We must be comedic and critical, eliciting joy
and laughter while opening the way to liberation. However, with the
far-right currently using humour as propaganda – something best
exemplified by the campus talks of Milo Yiannopoulos and the provocateur
comedy of Sam Hyde – there abounds a suspicion about the viability of an
explicitly political left comedy. Would a left comedy involve merely
inserting a left content into the forms of Yiannopoulous or Hyde – in
other words, presenting a ‘Milo of the left’? Or is there a uniquely
left-wing way to approach stand-up comedy, one more in tune with the
intrinsic characteristics of the art form itself? With Yiannopoulous or
Hyde, moreover, although their performances parallel comedy in general
or stand-up comedy more particularly, because of failings that are
ethical as much as aesthetic, they should not be described as stand-up
acts. While stand-up tends towards criticality, and has an element of
collectivism baked into it in the audience-performer interaction, it
would be wrong to say therefore that stand-up is necessarily leftist.
Nonetheless, the ethics emerging from the structure constituted by the
relation of comedian to audience makes stand-up a potentially fertile
terrain for the left.

Fascism Comedifies Politics
---------------------------

Described by some as a ‘comedian’, Milo is, however, no stand-up comic:
relying on lecterns and PowerPoint presentations, he avoids the
nakedness of genuine stand-up performance. These props of his serve as
armour for the ‘intellectual’ character act, the charade he has
constructed. They work as defences against audience criticism and
possibly against his own self-doubt. The stand-up comedian, by contrast,
is generally naked: they have nothing with which to guard themselves
against the audience but their body and speech. Yiannopoulos’s
performances, therefore (and they are certainly performances), may make
his audiences laugh – and in that sense they could be described as
comedy. They are certainly not stand-up, however, for they lack this
radical baring of oneself to the audience sans assisting props: Milo
symbolically shields himself from the crowd (or tries to), giving no
opportunity for the display of abjection often found in stand-up as an
art form proper.

If Milo stretches the definition of ‘comedian’, Sam Hyde sits more
comfortably in that category. A viral video producer and member of
sketch troupe Million Dollar Extreme, Hyde is a visible member of
alt-right fascist networks online. Million Dollar Extreme had a TV show
with Adult Swim before it was cancelled in late 2016, after controversy
took hold over the offensiveness of the sketches and Sam Hyde’s own
politics.

Hyde first became well known online for a comedic stunt in which he
hijacked a TED Talk at Drexel University. Dressed in gladiator armour,
he delivered a lecture titled ‘2070 Paradigm Shift’. The act moves in
style and content between a parody of a TED Talk and the open profession
of Turner Diaries-style far-right viewpoints. In it he describes culture
as a ‘sewer’ and predicts race war. Hyde is also known for a stunt
called ‘Privileged White Male Triggers Oppressed Victims, Ban This Video
Now and Block Him’ in which he reads out a list of pseudoscientific
‘facts’ justifying homophobia to an increasingly hostile Williamsburg
audience. Sometimes called ‘anti-comedy’, Hyde’s activities have puzzled
some, who have wondered: does he really believe what he says, or is it
all an ironic act? Though Hyde has refused to be pinned down on his
politics in interviews a visit to his Twitter account, @Night_0f_Fire,
should dispel any notion of irony. Nonetheless it’s this liminal
position – is it a joke or not? – that gives him a certain power.
Yiannopoulos has benefited from a similar ambiguity, being seen by some
as a provocateur who doesn’t really believe what he says, this quality
lending him legitimacy even when he insists he does believe it.

This Is Outrageous; It’s Contagious
-----------------------------------

Alongside these far-right attempts at humour comes a particular theory
of comedy as a carnivalesque space in which anything can be said or
done, rather than as an art form which comes with the same ethical and
political responsibilities for the author as any other. Memes like Pepe
and the ‘shitlord culture’ of 4chan are part of this constellation of
far-right humour. Yiannopoulos praises this new comedic thing for its
fearless, ‘mischievous’ explosion beyond the limits of acceptable
discourse, and tends to falsely construes much of its antics as knowing
irony borne of frustration with PC speech-policing, rather than as
genuine fascist speech. In this reactionary theory of comedy, which
works as a cover for propaganda, outrage and offense are made to be
central. Within this putatively value-free space of comedy, one finds
what Theweleit called the ‘utopia of fascism \[as\] an edenic freedom
from responsibility’. Therefore a theory of comedy as a space of
unrestricted speech, free from responsibility, allows real politics to
masquerade hypocritically as a joke in a way that trivialises politics;
that comedifies it. Thus, following Benjamin, if the right comedifies
politics, the left should politicise comedy.

Can Sam Hyde’s activities be classified as stand-up comedy? His primary
audience seems to be his sympathisers watching via the internet, rather
than his live audience. The latter are being pranked, and their
reactions supply much of the entertainment for the former group. Some
have called his work ‘anti-comedy’, though, usually, ‘anti-comedy’ means
audiences laughing at an intentional non-joke – a joke that is funny
because it subverts a traditional form. But Hyde’s performances often
elicit little laughter at all. Audience members sit in silence, vocally
resist, or walk out. And eliciting this response is his intent. Hyde’s
activities, although he performs in comedy clubs, would be better
described not as anti-comedy but as anti-stand-up. Stand-up comedy is a
live art form in which the joke is co-created by audience and performer.
Hyde’s activities, by contrast, *hijack* the setting and expectations of
stand-up comedy but use it to disseminate right-wing social critique.
Generally, stand-up comics are in a relationship of creative intimacy
with their audience. This relationship is not necessarily without
tension – but if a comic challenges the crowd to see the world
differently, or even offends them, they at least attempt to do it while
getting them to laugh along, and are all the more persuasive for that.
Total contempt for the audience is rare, and not sustainable for a
stand-up comedian.

Comedy and Contradiction
------------------------

Though stand-up comedy as bigotry, as in the reinforcement of existing
social relations through mockery, is nothing new, the form can also be
used as a means of emancipatory social criticism. For key to any joke is
incongruity; comedians often uncover the contradictions in social life
and norms, and audiences laugh at their disclosure. The showing up of
social mores as absurd through comedic critique can be used to find that
point of liberation, the crack in the accepted view of the world through
which the light of truth or freedom shines.

Like jokes, social transformation too proceeds from identifying a
contradiction of some sort, an absurdity – something that just doesn’t
make sense. Comedy often plays in the tension between the symbol and
what it refers to – or rather, what the comic and the audience agree
about this tension. This makes comedy inherently critical, though not
necessarily liberatory. It’s a weapon that can be used for progressive
or regressive ends. Anti-racism, respect for women’s rights and gay
rights, for example, can be construed as ‘sacred cows’ and turned
flipside through comedy, as they are in Sam Hyde’s performances.

When this communality is lost, stand-up comedy has become something
else. Audience participation in comedy – the more or less subtle
communication between comic and crowd, the ineffable sense of a room’s
tone – means that the stand-up comedian is never really browbeating or
standing apart from them. The comic and the audience are, ultimately, on
the same side. Thus comedy scholar John Limon remarks that ‘it is hard
to fathom how a stand-up performance can be outrageous, that is to say
(etymologically) outré, outside the circle. In standup as opposed to all
other modes of art and entertainment, there is only the circle.’ In
stand-up at least, outrageousness and offensiveness actually detract
from the work – contra the reactionary theory of comedy, upheld by
Yiannopoulos and others, which centres them.

Stand-up Comedians and Progressive Struggles
--------------------------------------------

Stand-up comedians playing a role in progressive politics is nothing
new: Dick Gregory was as much an activist in the civil rights movement
as he was a stand-up comic taking on racism in his performance. The UK’s
alternative comedy scene in the 1980s was explicitly founded as a
non-racist, non-sexist and non-homophobic alternative to the comedy
mainstream at the time. In fact, politics is rife in stand-up comedy. In
the work of Maria Bamford we find a major contemporary example of
critical comedy serving emancipatory ends and working on contradictions
in creative ways. She transforms difficult experiences into powerful
advocacy and social criticism in her comedy, much of which deals with
mental health. In her stand-up she explores her struggles with
depression, anxiety, bipolar-II and a form of obsessive-compulsive
disorder from which she suffers called unwanted thoughts syndrome.

Bamford’s humour often arises from the tension between the smiling
façade people present to the world and the truth of their inner life. In
a bit about how Paula Deen’s recipes all read ‘like a suicide note’,
between surreal imitations of Deen’s recipes she exclaims ‘each day I
wake to a fresh nightmare’ and ‘don’t look for me: I’ve made a plan and
I will follow through with it!’ The darkness in this material comes
through as the human pain that bursts through the cultural norm – the
informal proscription on discussing depression.

Bamford destigmatises mental illness and challenges myths surrounding it
– often through hilarious vocal imitations of naïve, faux-concerned
friends, family members and acquaintances who beset the suffering
individual with pressures and misconceptions. She shies away from
nothing in this regard, and has audiences laughing from suicide attempt
to psych ward.

She also deals with gender pressures in her comedy: 'holding myself to
an impossible standard of beauty keeps me from starting a riot!’ Making
an audience laugh is an experience of power, even if the humour is of a
self-deprecating kind. Female success in stand-up has come later than
male because audiences have been less disposed to seeing women in power.

But socially critical comedy doesn’t always come from a direct
experience of marginalisation. Comedians can self-deprecatingly
undermine their own position, disclosing social disparities and
contradictions by laying bare their privileged social location. Maria
Bamford jokes:

> My neighbour is super nice, neighbour Carlos, came over and he said,
> 'I hope you don't mind living next to a Mexican, “cause we leave shit
> on our lawn.” I said, 'Well, if we're going to talk in stereotypes, I
> hope you don't mind living next to a white lady – “cause I'm gonna
> steal that shit. Manifest Destiny, it's kind of already mine.”

Stand-up comedy is a medium in which performers frequently put abjection
on display, personal as much as social, which means it can show the
abject reality of injustice and dispossession which we would rather
slough off and ignore.

For Limon, what is stood up in stand-up comedy is the abject. He
summarises his book on American comedy thus: ‘The one-sentence version
of the theory of this book would state the claim that what is stood up
in stand-up comedy is abjection. Stand-up makes vertical (or ventral)
what should be horizontal (or dorsal).’

This fear of baring one’s abjection to the audience characterises
Yiannopoulos’ performances and distinguishes them from stand-up comedy
proper. Though he proudly displays his homosexual identity as a kind of
abjection, this is done in service of reigning social norms. Too afraid
to undermine himself, Yiannopoulos is more the ‘wit’ than the stand-up
comic, more in the vein of a Christopher Hitchens or a Stephen Fry.
Theweleit characterised the type of the wit thus:

> ‘Momentum; verbal machine-gunning, thinking as quick as lightning,
> sparkling wit, “esprit,” brilliant humor. Such skills are often said
> to be rare among women. True enough perhaps; yet the conclusion should
> be that what women lack men should equally abandon. The more men’s
> polished words gather momentum, the more they distance themselves from
> intrusive feelings; they bask in armoured brilliance. More than this,
> they do violence to anything similar to themselves; they identify
> their own faults in others with punctilious precision, and mercilessly
> annihilate them.’

Could this description not apply to the verbal antics of the President?

Trump himself has been likened to a stand-up comedian, though he falls
more into this category of the penetrative, violent male wit. Indeed,
one of Trump’s outrageous ‘jokes’ that became famous early on in his
campaign bears a strong resemblance to the disgust with women’s mouths,
association of these with vaginas, and images of such mouths dripping
with blood or spittle which Theweleit finds in the interwar writings of
fascist soldier males. That joke was about the journalist Megyn Kelly:

> ‘She gets out and she starts asking me all sorts of ridiculous
> questions. You could see there was blood coming out of her eyes, blood
> coming out of her wherever.

Here women are babbling, physiologically disgusting menstruators. Such a
motif accords with a general somatophobia found in fascist texts and
which characterises Trump. Trump has a seeming general disgust with the
body: he is said to be a germophobe, obsessed with washing his hands,
clearly fearing bodily abjection. In many of the fascist writings
Theweleit studies in his book *Male Fantasies*, ‘\[t\]he mouth appears
as a source of nauseating evil. It is “that venomous hole” that spouts
out a “rain of spittle.”’ If, as Limon contends, stand-up comedy
requires a baring of one’s own abjection to the audience, it is this
that the humour of the ‘stand-up comic’ Trump is designed, armoured to
prevent, here with the body as the sign of it.

But if progressive comics aspire to display some of the world’s
abjection for the sake of a social critique, they cannot help but be
corrupted by that marketized world, often alongside greater success.
Bamford routinely expresses a tragic frustration that she’s unable to
change the world with comedy, and expresses angst about the limitations
of the medium. She’s also aware of the compromises comics with a message
often have to make for the sake of fame and success: &gt; But you know
how it goes – you need health benefits so you start working for the man.
You know, I was just typing out what he had to say. I felt like I was
taking back the night from inside the machine, because it makes a
difference to this starfish. And then you get a promotion. And my ego
says uh, I wanna be on TV and it turns out the man owns that. He just
wants to make you do a couple changes to your jokes so as not to upset
his buddies/corporate entities. And I made those changes. And then the
man says, “I’ll give you a big bag of money if you just say what I want
you to say.” And I took that big bag of money and I said exactly what he
wanted me to say. And now I’m re-decorating my house in shades of grey!

Dave Chappelle and the Ambiguities of Comedy Success
----------------------------------------------------

At the height of comic superstardom, Dave Chappelle has seen these
problems first hand. Echoing Bamford’s concerns about ‘the Man’,
Chappelle expresses a frustration with the ethical and political
compromises big-name comics are sometimes pressured to make:

> Maybe corporate America fucks with human beings like they’re products
> and investments. Maybe a motherfucker brings you into a room and says,
> “this 50 million dollars, this pile of money, it’s all for you” – and
> when you try to grab it he just throws his dick right on top of it.

Chappelle’s huge success has come with drawbacks. Not only have
executives interfered with his work, but audiences have misinterpreted
it. In 2004, at the height of his fame, he walked away from his hit TV
sketch show on Comedy Central, leaving behind a \$50m deal. He had
experienced a white crew member laughing uproariously at an act in which
Chappelle put on blackface. Reflecting on the matter, the comedian said
that

> I was doing sketches that were funny but socially irresponsible. I
> felt like I was deliberately being encouraged and I was overwhelmed.
> It's like you are cluttered with things and you don't pay attention to
> things like your ethics.

Thus Chappelle ran into the phenomenon of failed irony – a sketch which
he had intended as a mockery of racist stereotypes was received as a
hilarious confirmation of them. Jokes are co-created by audience and
comic not only with regards to whether they’re funny or not; audiences
also determine what jokes *mean*. The larger and more diverse the
audience, the more opportunities there are to be misread.

In his stand-up, Chappelle frequently digs into the subject of racism
and racist police violence. He also uses his comedy to de-mythologise
American sacred cows. In his special *For What It’s Worth* he discusses
the removal of the image of Saddam Hussein from Iraqi currency during
the US occupation. He describes the image of the dictator as a ‘subtle
psychological nuance of oppression’ but then asks ‘what about our money?
Our money looks like baseball cards with slave-owners on ’em.’
Chappelle’s seemingly effortless likeability and his proficiency in
dirty jokes and weed humour allow him to masterfully smuggle social
critique into his stand-up. The title of his 2000 comedy special
*Killin’ Em Softly* indicates something of Chappelle’s method: social
commentary cuts deep but is surreptitiously and smoothly delivered.

Yet Chappelle has recently been celebrated by some on the right for a
set in which he reportedly took aim at gay rights, women’s rights and
transgender people, even seemingly defending Trump against sexual
assault allegations. Chappelle’s work has an ambiguity that permits it
to be appropriated by different sections of the political spectrum at
different times. Some of what Chappelle says is progressive and some of
it regressive. Other parts invite multiple readings. It’s often unclear
what his exact socio-political motivation is, and in part this ambiguity
helps to maintain his popularity with a racially diverse American
audience.

Even so, Chappelle paid the price. He saw his work tampered with. In an
interview with James Lipton he recounts a sketch he had shot, about his
being booed off at the Apollo Theater in Harlem, causing scepticism
among white television executives because there weren’t any white people
in it. Chappelle has called his own career a ‘parable’; indeed, it
provides useful lessons on the possibilities and limits of mass-market
comedy as a vehicle for social critique.

This ambiguity is perhaps innate to the form: political speech and
stand-up comedy are, of course, not identical, and while comedy *can* be
a means of emancipatory social criticism, stand-up comedians cannot
replace public intellectuals, nor should they. On the other hand, the
lack of a direct correspondence between comedy and political propaganda
should not lead to our imagining they are utterly distinct, any more
than would be the case with regards to any other art form – should not,
in other words, lead to a nihilism. A nihilism is proclaimed by the
reactionary theory of comedy as a space in which ‘anything goes’, but
this is perfectly hypocritical, since fascist humour is in fact not
valueless but full of value: Sam Hyde’s work operates more like direct
political speech much of the time, rather than possessing anything like
the self-undermining, abjecting quality to stand-up. Here the feint of
nihilism is simply a cover for far-right propaganda.

And whilst comedy is always comedy and can never replace socio-political
critique proper, we must be attentive to the ways in which joking which
raises critical questions about society and even attacks its injustices
can, nonetheless, through the cathartic release of laughter in the
audience, leave the latter well-adjusted to iniquity rather than
mobilised to do anything in particular about it. We must be careful not
to confuse the mere allusion to social problems in humour as a
sufficient comedic critique and intervention. In this connection, comedy
scholar Rebecca Krefting’s concept of ‘charged humor’, which names a
form of stand-up that motivates action and builds community amongst the
marginalised, ‘comedy that aims to create community using shared
experiences of occlusion, misrepresentation, stigmatization and
oppression as the basis for identification’, is useful. Krefting cites
Maria Bamford, and others such as Hari Kondabolu and George Lopez, as
examples of charged comics.

Arguably the process of audience and performer co-creating the joke in
the stand-up comedy environment, discussed above, has taken a new turn
with the advent of the internet. As the internet increasingly dominates
and determines other media, audiences fragment. These fragmented
audiences take different bits from a comedy special, different aspects
of a comic’s persona, and use these to celebrate or denounce the
performer and their work. Although this constitutes a more recent
phenomenon, stand-up comedy especially conduces to this process of
cutting up, this selecting of aspects of an author’s work for praise or
critique, given that the form generally consists in short bursts (jokes)
rather than great arcs or storylines. Co-creation of the joke has thus
taken on a new form: the audience is empowered to disseminate critique,
relatively freed from the mediation of TV executives and advertisers, in
a manner suited to their own ends. The audience now not only co-creates
the joke through their laughter (or absence of, or outrage) but now
possesses the tools to edit and distribute it. This remixing of
stand-up, a production in use by the consumer, extends and complexifies
what already happens in stand-up comedy; it provides new means for
propaganda. These are means the left should grasp, since the right are
already doing so. The left should find creative ways to mobilise comedy
in a variety of fora, to rally and to use this art as a means of finding
liberation and of healing patriarchal and capitalist damage. Comedy can
and should be part of creating new ways of feeling for a socialist
future.
