The Inevitability of the Gig Economy
====================================

by [Wendy Liu](https://twitter.com/dellsystem)

The gig economy may finally be souring in the eyes of the public. No
longer widely heralded as the pinnacle of ingenuity and customer
convenience, companies like Uber and Deliveroo are facing increasingly
negative press coverage of [their exploitative business
model](https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/15/he-truth-about-working-for-deliveroo-uber-and-the-on-demand-economy).
Even the innovative merits of the gig economy are being challenged by no
less than the Financial Times, in [a surprisingly radical
op-ed](https://ftalphaville.ft.com/2017/06/05/2189733/the-gig-economy-is-not-an-innovation/)
questioning the narrative that the gig economy is the inevitable result
of technological change, and asking whether broader economic factors
also played a role.

What the Financial Times article misses, however, is the opportunity to
name the culprit, and thus the entire teleological aspect of the gig
economy. It’s true that its rise is not simply the inevitable result of
technological change. But the economic factors that played a role aren’t
merely a coincidence, either. It would be more accurate to say that the
gig economy is the inevitable result of technological change *under
neoliberalism*.

Neoliberalism and the Shape of the Internet Revolution
------------------------------------------------------

To truly understand the gig economy, you have to examine how its
ascendance was shaped by the recent evolution of capitalism. You have to
untangle the neoliberal knot to find the three main threads that, when
paired with technological innovation, explain the gig economy’s rise:
the role of ideology; the recent excess of capital; and the ongoing
decline in the power of labour. It’s the confluence of all these factors
that laid the foundations for the gig economy.

The first thread relates to the main ideological underpinnings of the
technology startup world. As [Moira Weigel writes in The
Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/news/2017/oct/31/coders-of-the-world-unite-can-silicon-valley-workers-curb-the-power-of-big-tech),
the primary strain of thought in the industry pairs personal liberty
with a pro-market stance, in an outright celebration of capitalist credo
even while other industries might try to downplay its influence. In this
world, wealth is a wonderful thing that doesn’t need to be justified,
and economic inequality is [a celebrated consequence of the disruption
unleashed by
startups](https://qz.com/586563/paul-graham-just-accidentally-explained-everything-wrong-with-silicon-valleys-world-view/).
For the individual entrepreneur, it’s all about using the market to
achieve personal glory—to be called the next Zuckerberg and get your
face on the cover of Time—and that’s sublimated into an almost religious
pursuit of growth. Not personal growth, but growth via the cybernetic
extension of you that is your startup. Parasitic, unstoppable growth.
Skirt regulations, [“hack the
system”](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=104802), sacrifice your
personal health; whatever it takes until your startup blankets the
world.

The second thread is a consequence of easy monetary policy after the
financial crisis, when federally-mandated low interest rates resulted in
an excess of capital seeking out increasingly scarce avenues for
profitable investment. Nick Srnicek calls this [asset-based
Keynesianism](http://salvage.zone/online-exclusive/platform-capitalism-and-value-form/),
and the consequence is overaccumulation—too much capital chasing high
returns at a time of general stagnation. *Venture* capital is the most
demanding form that this capital takes, because their investments are
intentionally high-risk; as [3 of every 4 startups are expected to
fail](https://www.fastcompany.com/3003827/why-most-venture-backed-companies-fail),
the remaining ones have to return enough to make up for the rest. Which
means there’s no point in investing in companies that promise only
modest returns over a long period of time. Instead, the prevailing
mentality is more
[go-big-or-go-home](https://techcrunch.com/2017/10/26/toxic-vc-and-the-marginal-dollar-problem/)
- unless your startup has the possibility of becoming absolutely massive
in a short period of time, you’ll have a hard time convincing
early-stage investors to give you their money.

On the other hand, once your business model has received venture
capital’s stamp of approval, raising more money becomes fairly
straightforward. This is how [Uber managed to raise \$15 billion at a
valuation of \$68
billion](https://www.vanityfair.com/news/2016/06/why-is-uber-raising-so-much-money),
despite massive losses: if you have monopolistic ambitions and a
technology-fuelled growth trajectory, a lot can be forgiven. Technology
has become a sort of collective dream, in which investors’ boundless
optimism for the promise of “innovation” becomes a belief that the
industry can absorb unlimited amounts of surplus capital. If you think
this sounds eerily reminiscent of the conditions that produced the
dot-com bubble, [you’re not
alone](https://www.inc.com/magazine/201509/jeff-bercovici/are-we-in-a-tech-bubble.html)
— though, of course, some venture capitalists have [a vested interest in
declaring
otherwise](https://a16z.com/2016/08/20/why-software-is-eating-the-world/).

The last thread is the weakening influence of labour under
neoliberalism, most notably in the US under Reagan and in the UK under
Thatcher. The short story is: after a period of economic prosperity in
many developed countries post-WWII, growth began to falter; in the
consequent struggle over how to distribute diminishing profits, capital
won, resulting in the balance of power shifting away from labour. In the
last few decades, we’ve seen the decline of union power, the rollback of
market-impeding regulations, and the cutting of public services. Added
to this dangerous mix we have the fallout of the financial crisis, which
left most of the advanced economies with high un- and underemployment,
not to mention millions of people underwater on their mortgages.
Combined with the austerity-driven hollowing out of the welfare state,
the outcome is increased precarity as more and more people have no
option but to find paid employment in order to survive.

Together, these threads form the socioeconomic landscape onto which the
invention of the smartphone emerged. And so the perfect storm of
economic factors combines with technological change: the technology
entrepreneurs, who have no problem skirting regulations in the pursuit
of growth, and flush with cash from approving venture capitalists, see
an opportunity to profit from the smartphone proliferation among all
this idle labour. Of course, that’s probably not how they think of it.
For them, it’s merely a technical solution to a personal problem: making
it easier to order food, or get a ride to the airport, or get their
clothes washed. The existence of a class of people who are willing to be
on the *other* side of those transactions—to run errands for a stranger
in exchange for a small amount of money—is taken for granted. They
assume that there exists a smartphone-equipped reserve army of labour,
people who are just waiting for a push notification before they spring
into action, ready to take on any job no matter how poorly paid or
stultifying.

And they were *right*. That army did exist, and still does. It is on the
back of their efforts and the assumption of their continued existence
that gig economy companies have been able to climb to such vertiginous
valuations.

Monopolised Capital—Precarious Labour
-------------------------------------

In a way, then, the real innovation behind the gig economy—the real
reason behind its economic inevitability—isn’t primarily technical. It’s
in the way technological change interacts with labour, giving rise to a
new type of corporation. In [Platform
Capitalism](http://salvage.zone/online-exclusive/platform-capitalism-and-value-form/),
the major companies behind the gig economy are referred to as “lean
platforms”, characterised by a business model that involves owning as
few physical assets as possible; instead, the focus is on software
assets, which are key to high potential profit margins and growth rates.
Labour that doesn’t directly add to intellectual property creation is
abstracted away, as these companies attempt to import the software
industry’s [monopoly-driven
tendencies](https://www.inc.com/zoe-henry/peter-thiel-how-to-build-a-monopoly.html)
into the untapped market of the real world. This is how these companies
were able to scale so quickly—no corporation that depends on the
long-term development of physical assets can scale as quickly as Uber
(founded 2009) or Deliveroo (founded 2013). Thus this business model has
an almost evolutionary advantage, in that corporations that adopt this
model will either out-scale their competitors or die trying. This is the
sort of thing that gets venture capitalists really excited, and so
they’re happy to subsidise operations ([at least for a few
years](https://www.salon.com/2016/03/27/good_riddance_gig_economy_uber_ayn_rand_and_the_awesome_collapse_of_silicon_valleys_dream_of_destroying_your_job/))
while the kinks are sorted out.

Of course, the real world is a lot messier than the digital world;
information may be infinitely and instantly replicable, but most
physical goods are surely not. Still, you can approximate the efficiency
of the digital by taking a lean platform approach. For taxis: don’t own
cars or employ drivers, just convince people who already own cars to
drive others around and give you a cut of whatever they make. For
cleaning houses: don’t hire cleaners or even buy cleaning supplies, just
be the platform that connects customers with cleaners who desperately
need work. For food delivery: don’t employ the couriers, and certainly
don’t own the *restaurants*, just get cash-strapped cyclists to speed
anxiously between restaurant and customer, knowing that their livelihood
depends on the pizza still being warm when it arrives. Despite the
pretense that workers benefit from the flexibility these jobs offer, the
gig economy is really little more than the high-tech version of the
historical ‘day labourer’ market—combining corporations’ drive for cheap
and plentiful labour with technological innovations that enable it.

Thus the lean platform approach is the ultimate startup fantasy. The
strategy is to eliminate any corporeal assets that might slow growth, in
order to become an assetless behemoth that manages to [skim off the top
of every
transaction](https://twitter.com/existentialcoms/status/912480546554441728).
Anything that is not crucial to producing the intellectual property
(branding, software, data) of these companies should be shed, because
digital assets are scalable and can be reproduced at zero marginal cost
while physical assets are not. The actual human beings who drive the
cars or deliver the food or clean the houses are the least desirable
assets of all, saddling the corporation with baggage that could impede
growth: pensions, healthcare, regular wages even if there’s no demand
for their services. In an ideal world, these corporations would not have
to rely on human workers at all; instead they’d simply own the software
for powering [self-flying
drones](http://uk.businessinsider.com/delivery-drones-market-service-2017-7)
and [self-driving
cars](https://www.wired.com/story/uber-crisis-self-driving-pittsburgh/).
Software can’t complain about low wages, or unionise, or [file worker
protections lawsuits that force startups to shut
down](https://www.recode.net/2015/7/17/11614814/cleaning-services-startup-homejoy-shuts-down-after-battling-worker).
Workers, however, can: [they’re
organising](http://politicalcritique.org/world/2017/precarious-couriers-are-leading-the-struggle-against-platform-capitalism/),
and raising awareness, and starting to turn the tide of public opinion
against the corporations.

None of which is anything new, of course. This is the same sort of class
struggle that we’ve seen throughout history, and as with every previous
attempt by an exploited class to demand better treatment, gig economy
workers are meeting fierce resistance from their oppressors, who justify
their exploitation by framing it in terms of innovation and growth.
After all, better worker protections don’t mesh with a growth-oriented
lean business model; preferably, there would be a stream of on-demand
contractors who are willing to do the most menial of tasks in exchange
for subsistence-level income. The goal is to shift the burden of the
reproduction of labour away from the employer, leaving someone else—the
state, the worker’s family, charities, who cares—to pick up the slack.
In a very visceral way, these corporations are attempting to subvert the
unwritten contract that previous generations have expected: by exposing
their workers to the vicissitudes of the market, they abdicate their
expected responsibility to provide for them *while still making money
off their work*.

We Only Want the Earth
----------------------

To defenders of the gig economy, the recent backlash seems ridiculous.
In their view, workers should be grateful that these apps provide them
with any work at all, which they otherwise wouldn’t have access to. Why
on earth would workers complain about having something rather than
nothing? Surely it’s better than the initial, pre-gig economy starting
conditions of un- and underemployment.

But that’s a false dichotomy that speaks to a failure of imagination. We
don’t necessarily need to return to the initial starting conditions. We
can be much more ambitious than that: we can imagine an entirely
different world, one that requires a fundamental rethinking of the
current economic system. We should ask ourselves if our economic
optimization function has trapped us in a local maximum—a suboptimal
situation that can’t be ameliorated by moving forward or backward—and if
we need to take a stochastic leap of faith into the unknown in search of
something better. The corporations who are succeeding in this new
economy may not be *responsible* for the situation we’re in, but if we
let them continue operating untrammeled, [we may never get out of
it](https://nplusonemag.com/issue-29/the-intellectual-situation/disrupt-the-citizen-2/).

Maybe it’s time we go back to first principles. What do we actually
want? What is the goal we want our economic system to achieve? What sort
of society do we want to build, and how is it different from the society
we have now? We have to hold on to that vision to figure out how to get
there. We have to remember that before anything else, we are human
beings living in a society of other human beings and that everything
we’ve constructed is just artifice on top of that.

These companies, and the people who work for them, did not personally
create the conditions of precarity that allowed them to accumulate power
and profit on an enormous scale. They are not to blame for these
preconditions. But if we ever want to *transcend* these preconditions,
we’ll have to halt their pursuit of never ending growth.

In the short term, this will mean using regulatory channels to improve
employment conditions for workers. There has been some success so far,
but it’s still quite limited: [Uber may have lost their appeal to
classify drivers as
self-employed](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/nov/13/uber-lost-appeal-workers-employment-rights),
but there is no guarantee that this ruling will be enforced in a speedy
manner, especially since Uber plans to appeal the ruling (again); on the
flip side, Deliveroo actually [won their own legal battle over workers’
rights](https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/nov/14/deliveroo-couriers-minimum-wage-holiday-pay).
Alternatively, launching a [competing worker-owned
app](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2016/07/uber-drivers-app-ridesharing-taxis-sharing-economy/)
may be another way of protecting workers’ rights.

In the long term, though, we’ll have to do more than change a few
regulations and start some new co-ops. Ultimately, the real societal
threat these companies pose isn’t limited to the confines of the gig
economy—it’s *everywhere*, anywhere there is low-paid work in
substandard conditions. The gig economy is just the latest means of
using technology to get precarious workers to sacrifice their time in
the service of capital. As long as we accept disempowerment of workers
in the name of greater efficiency, as long as we prioritise the rights
of individual corporations to gain market share over our collective
rights as people, then the underlying conditions will stay the same, and
the exploitation epitomised by the gig economy will not go away.

In the end, if we really want to confront the gig economy, we can’t
narrow our focus to the convenient villains provided by the Ubers and
Deliveroos of the world. Taking down the current crop of corporations
will not solve the larger structural factors that allowed them to scale
so quickly in the first place. To truly combat the gig economy, we’ll
have to combat neoliberalism. We’ll need to fight for decommodification,
and demand better public services, and challenge the intellectual
hegemony of the free market. We’ll need to be bold enough to imagine a
better world: a world where economic gains are shared equally, and where
technology is used not to divide and control us but instead to truly
*liberate* us. A world, in short, where there is no more gig economy.
