Introduction
============

by [Tom Gann](https://twitter.com/Tom_Gann)

It certainly felt like a victory. The day the election was called, our
friend Lucy was visiting us in Seville: we had bought the slightly silly
selection of food you buy when you’re over-excited with friends you
haven’t seen for too long, returned from the supermarket, heard the news
and ate our haul aghast. All of us had faith that the Corbyn project
could connect with the obvious and very deep frustrations, and worse,
faced by people in Britain; equally, all of us thought that any
electoral progress would take years of hard organisational and cultural
work. A snap election, and almost-certain heavy defeat, seemed to have
blocked any hope of this. Even as the campaign gathered momentum, the
New Socialist editorial group were working on the presumption that
Labour would lose seats but increase our vote share to about 35%. This,
we felt, would mean we had a role in the likely struggle over the
meaning of the result. “Slug Pellets”, our election campaign dossier
that became “A Vow of Silence”, was largely working on this supposition,
as was the most worked out draft of our election results editorial,
which we then had to frantically (and drunkenly and gleefully) rework
throughout the night and early morning. So, given all this, it certainly
felt like a victory.

However, despite the memes, Jeremy Corbyn is not the Prime Minister. The
Tories’ squalid arrangement with the DUP, which will (Rosa Gilbert),
“help to embolden the DUP’s voice at a time when the power-sharing
arrangements in Northern Ireland are under a great deal of strain.
Attempting to placate the DUP with financial bungs as a form of
confidence and supply will further embed unionist rule at the expense of
nationalists as the former present themselves as the gatekeepers of
investment and governance in the region”, coupled with the discipline
imposed by the ruling class’s fairly obvious terror at a mild social
democratic government led by Corbyn could mean that we still face four
or more years of a Conservative government. Indeed, the memes themselves
pose their own questions about how to think about the status of
“victory”. Implicit in the essays in this ebook is an argument between
Joe Kennedy and Suze Marsupial over how generously to view them (and I
would like to suggest a third possible interpretation). Kennedy views
the section of Corbynite twitter with a certain suspicion, offering
“stylised, memeable puerility perhaps set up to suggest that there’s no
longer any point in attempting meaningful dialogue” whereas, Marsupial,
describes a “raucous glee unprecedented in my adult life. Ironic and
reckless and outrageously grotesque. The young left is hopeful and
disgusting, argumentative yet strangely united. Full of rudeness,
revenge and revolting energy.” Moreover, this means that right across
the policy landscape we will see the continuation of cruel, bleak
policies rather than positive, humane ones. Reproductive rights, as
discussed by Charlotte Nichols, are just one crucial area where we will
encounter “an uphill struggle that those who care about the right to
choose have on their hands as this government clings to power”.

Moreover, any future left Labour government will face a range of
pressures -- both internal, as documented in “A Vow of Silence”, and
external, as Perry Anderson conceives of Parliament as “an isolated,
spot-lit enclave, surrounded on almost every side by hostile territory,
unceasingly shelled by industry, press and orchestrated ‘public
opinion’,” which “each time.. has in the end been over-run”. Moreover, a
left Labour government would today face, as Joe Guninan and Thomas Hanna
argue in “Full Corbynism”, even greater pressure from financial markets,
such that “getting elected may be the easy part. There is a strong
possibility that a Corbyn government will take power in the midst of the
greatest crisis of confidence in the British economy since the end of
the Second World War.” The question of whether Labour would be
politically and intellectually able to implement a left programme is at
the very least one that cannot be answered unequivocally optimistically.
There is a difference between occupying office and exercising power.
Exercising power requires, as demonstrated and demanded by Tom Blackburn
in “Corbynism from Below”, very serious work on building popular power,
with community solidarity projects, “lay\[ing\] the foundations for a
mass movement which can empower a future Labour government not just to
occupy office, but to wield power with the goal of delivering
wide-ranging social transformation.”

The feeling of victory (or perhaps, more precisely, of having defeated
an enemy) is meaningful and worthwhile: it grasps something and it
honours the efforts put in by Party members and supporters. Sometimes,
against Cabral, claiming easy victories helps with morale. However,
there is a complacency and a timidity that is potentially dangerous. The
questions of “whose victory?”, “who did we defeat” and “what,
positively, was our victory for” are essential to addressing the
election result and drawing useful conclusions from it.

The election result, quite clearly, was not a victory for what we have
described as “the establishment within Labour” who consistently aimed to
sabotage the campaign (and may have cost the Party an outright victory).
It is tempting to describe this behaviour, in a situation where members
and supporters put in huge amounts of time and effort, unpaid, to secure
disruptive MPs a well remunerated job as self-indulgent. To do so,
however, would imply that they shared a goal with the Party base and the
leadership, but undermined it through egotism. Instead, it is clear that
many MPs and figures in the establishment within the Labour Party did
not and continue to not want to see a minimally leftist Labour Party
elected. The election result was a victory for those who the
establishment within the Labour Party wanted to be taught a lesson by
crushing defeat. It is worth noting that in our accounts of campaigning
it fairly quickly became clear to those campaigning (unlike the
establishment pundits or establishment within the Labour Party, who are
“smoothly integrated - through a mixture of shared class interests,
mutually beneficial leaks and social ties -- with the gossip peddlers
who masquerade as political journalists in the Westminster lobby”) that
enthusiasm for Corbyn and the manifesto was genuine and considerable, as
shown in all the accounts of campaigning we have collected, particularly
notably in Jenny Lennox’s comments in “The Red Tide hits Chingford”. The
result is also a victory for the steadfastness and resilience both of
the Party base and the leadership who faced a very consciously intended
war of psychological attrition, certain features of which are described
and analysed by Joe Kennedy. This war of attrition was aimed most
intensely and most repulsively at Diane Abbott.

The victory, moreover, is not just the result but the experience of
solidarity and collective power experienced during the campaign. Dan
Frost says, talking about the campaign in Croydon, “this election has
been a transformative experience for many of us, and the Labour Party
itself will have been shaped differently in the process. The future of
the Left in Croydon is perhaps brighter now than it has ever been...we
have learnt just how much more we are capable of...Canvassing has
fostered the formation of affinity groups, connections between activists
which straddle the social and the political.” Paradoxically, a narrowly
electoralist campaign may have created some of the momentum to build the
necessary Corbynite from Below organising that goes beyond electoralism.
Finally, as documented in a number of pieces, most notably those of Kyle
Geraghty and Andrea Marie, the victory was also the victory of Labour
voters who were (and more below) significantly more female, younger and,
significantly, working class, when class is understood as through
(Geraghty), “economic location as the primary component of class, as
described in Marxist theory. This contrasts to the typical definition
used, which drawing on Weberian analysis, focuses on how specific life
attitudes are generated through the mediation of the skills and outcomes
of specific occupations with only a peripheral relationship to these
occupations place within capitalism as a whole.”

A further significant question is who did we defeat. Firstly, the
establishment within Labour, or that part of Labour that functions as
the moderate wing of the austerity party, was defeated, but this was the
defeat of a whole host of other tendencies that have in many cases a
right-wing and a centrist articulation. Firstly, as suggested by Dom
Fox’s argument, “perhaps the first time in decades, it appears that the
Tories underestimated the emotional maturity of the British electorate.
Corbyn’s appeal, and his astonishing success in the election, is due in
part to the fact that he gave them something better to live up to”: this
was a victory over a corrosive, nihilism, and one that, as the entirety
of the Tory campaign showed, treated the electorate as socially sadistic
or just utterly resigned and entirely incurious. As the essay from
Everyday Analysis suggests, this was, an exemplary case of narcissistic
misrecognition from the Tory leadership and strategists. If, as Chris
Green argues, a large part of understanding hegemony is understanding
“how subordinate groups in society come to see the world in the same
terms as those at the top, despite their divergent interests”, this
narcissistic misrecognition amounted to an overestimation of the extent
of their hegemony.

As well as a victory over the nihilism of the right, the election result
was also a victory over the technocratic nihilism of sensible centrists,
whether in the Labour Party or in the media, and indeed as Tom Mills
argues, there are in many ways little difference between the two: “in
the case of the centrist and Blairite political commentators, their
interpretation of the world is aligned with the interests and operating
assumptions of a particular subset of the political class with whom they
are networked politically and socially”. Alex Williams’s critique shows
precisely the nihilism in the apparently frivolous “fantasy cabinets”
(this is perhaps a nihilism of a slightly younger generation of useless
centrist commentators, with a marginally different world), it is a
fantasy of politics without struggle without the possibility of the
generation of new values. As Williams argues, “these fantasy cabinets
sought to get past the tiresome business of actual political conflict,
with its material interests, policy programmes, and passions. Instead we
were to imagine what might put all these things to rest, a government of
‘talents’, for the national interest… The 2017 election result has
proven to be a live experiment in such a collision between a hegemonic
ideology and its imminent destruction”. If the Owl of Minerva only
appears at midnight, the rigour and astuteness of Williams, Mills and
Kennedy’s arguments offer the hopeful possibility that this tendency may
be over, its economic-political basis lost as much as its cultural
purposes, flailing around for a new centre party or idolising the
already corrosively unpopular Macron; alternatively, it may assume an
ever more grotesque and stuplime afterlife.

It should be clear, I think, who won and against whom and what. The
victory over various forms of what it is not an overstatement to
describe as nihilism is cemented by how far the election result was a
shock (and in particular a shock to those, including many in the PLP who
believed the electorate would “see sense” and in so doing destroy the
possibility of even mild social democracy as an electoral force). The
shock of the result confirms what it was a victory over and what the
result promises, that something (good) can happen, that the new is
possible. The right-wing cynical mode, and even more the centrist
cynical mode essentially deny that anything real can happen, we were,
apparently, at the end of history, politics was shifting various
technocrats who may occasionally have to throw a bone to “legitimate
concerns” around within a whimsical yet managerial frame.

Fukyuma’s grand synthesis, at least, has an epic mode and a moment of
negativity, a worry about “the last men”, about nihilism as a problem.
For centrist pundits and politicians, however, there is just smug
bafflement at any resistance, and this lack of a negative moment perhaps
explains their bilious incomprehension at the electorate not fulfilling
their allotted role. This bilious incomprehension, again as described by
Dom Fox, is particularly apparent with rage at the young failing to
split between their expected “apathy”, on the one hand, coupled with
what Adorno has described as “the false maturity of resignation”, on the
other.

One aspect of what Joe Kennedy describes as “anti-Corbynism as wind-up”,
is that it is a relatively deliberate strategy; the other side, however,
is that they really hate us for thinking history isn’t over, and for
acting on that consciously and rationally and in a way that does not, as
with right-wing populism, merely repeat in exaggerated, grotesque but,
therefore, purer, form the cruelty of the existing order. The endless
tedious attempts to identify the far-left (or even Corbyn’s mild social
democracy) with the far-right aim to deny both right-wing populism’s
derivation from and clarification of the current order, and to place
Corbynism within the imagined “popular irrationalities” that justify
technocratic forms of politics. The choice for voters is held by the
establishment to be between immaturity and mature resignation. As I
argued, it is extremely dangerous and wrong-headed to argue that a
Corbynite populism (if such a description is even valid) is anything
like inserting a left-wing content into a form that is indeterminate
between left and right.

The positive content of the “victory”, however, is significantly more
unclear. Lukács argues that the anti-capitalist consciousness is not, in
itself, enough for the working class to assert themselves as the true
subject of history. Equally, early German and Russian Social Democracy
-- that is, social democracy that ran the gamut from Lenin to
revisionist incorporation in existing social patterns -- argued that the
negative resistance of the workers’ movement to exploitation was
necessary but, without positive political construction, risked the
limited, sectional and unpolitical forms of the British labour movement.
There are analogies here with the position of Corbynism, negatively we
can see a strong, powerful rejection of austerity, perhaps too of
neoliberalism and certainly neoliberalism’s a national (if not local)
political forms, including the establishment within the Labour Party
whose aim has always been “to constitute itself as a compact body,
autonomous from this membership”. However, the positive construction is
still lacking: if it is not too immodest, we believe that New Socialist
has a role in this construction. The memes and raucous glee, by
contrast, represent a kind of justifiably gloating vindicated euphoria
of the negative. The negative here is necessary but insufficient without
serious, positive political-hegemonic construction. In the absence of
such a construction, it is absolutely possible to see Corbynism
splitting between compromise or full absorption into the traditional
limits constituted by incorporation in a subordinate role of the British
labour movement on the one hand, with an ultra-leftism on the other.
Both these positions deny the necessity of positive, hegemonic
construction.

Corbynism is a movement of, at least in the UK, of quite possibly
unprecedented potentiality. However, its actuality and achievements, so
far, do not live up to that potentiality. Its achievements have been
impressive, but largely (in a good way) destructive. As Dave Beer
argues, Corbynism has crack’d the hegemon, meaning “unpredictability and
uncertainty are unleashing new horizons of possibility. Imaginations are
being unblocked”, and this involved some very particular, in some ways
inconspicuous forms of cunning (that can be read as somewhere between or
encompassing Walter Benjamin and Columbo). The inconspicuous cunning of
Corbynism (which is also picked up by Dom Fox) further infuriates the
sensible centrists -- Corbyn and McDonnell are just much better at
politics even on their limited, bleak pragmatic terms. This is all
something to celebrate: victories are essential for morale. But
premature celebration can lead to complacency and the risk of not
putting into place the forms of democratisation to discipline the PLP
and party bureaucracy that we argued was essential in “A Vow of
Silence?” and in our coverage of what is needed at both this and next
year’s Conference. Complacency also risks a failure within the left to
generate new values and block the drift to the right and the compromise
with dominant values and practices which are held, in the absence of a
struggle over new values, to be, particularly as Jonathan Murden argues
when it comes to seeing policing and security as “unpolitical”. Chris
Green’s essay “Poor Gramsci” offers a sharp theoretical account for
understanding this risk, and demands resisting it. Oidptg’s analyses of
the reshuffle show how on the Parliamentary level this compromise has
been worked through, and the potential risks involved, noting that
“quite what the logic of bringing these MPs back into the fold and
trusting them with even junior shadow ministerial roles is remains a bit
of a mystery. Notions of “party unity” are lost on them and they hold
outdated, miserable politics that are directly at odds with those of the
leadership. Might it be worthwhile — as Ian Lavery recently did —
questioning the breadth of your church if a number of its congregation
insist on repeatedly attacking the priest publicly, refuse to sing from
the hymn sheet and think that your Bible isn’t racist enough?”

Class Politics in 2017
----------------------

A decisive question for the future of the left, one struggled over,
often implicitly and which we aim to clarify and develop is around
“class politics”. For Stuart Hall, quoted in Marie’s analysis of women,
and particularly working class women’s support for Corbyn, “what is at
issue here is ultimately the politics of constructing the unity of a
class - and in a recognisably present and modern, not simply historical,
form. Heroic attachments to the past will serve for tall stories in the
working men's club, but may not have much living connection to the real
problems of class, party and movement today.” If socialism is, as we
believe, to organise to a significant extent around class, this task
both in theory and in terms of practical construction will be key. This
is not to say, however, that every struggle that is of importance can be
absorbed even into a more generous, truer, expansive class politics.

One response from the Labour right to the election result, notably from
Gloria del Piero and the execrable Graham Jones, has been to assert
their own reactionary version of class politics, repeating the argument
that Corbyn is poison for working class voters because of his Islington
cosmopolitanism. How far this argument is honestly meant but mistaken is
perhaps an open question, in general, but when fused with the “nakedness
and childishness...opportunism” (Joe Kennedy) of its more stuplime
features, such as Wes Streeting’s unhealthy fixation on McDonalds, at
least aspects of its bad faith should become clear. The reactionary
class politics argument here operates firstly, as Gearghty and Marie
both argue, on an idea of class that has always been inadequate,
confusing a reified cultural definition of class for one based on
economic location. The inadequacies of this system are particularly
apparent when it comes to grasping the social class of many women
workers, as Marie argues, against the argument Britain has become more
middle class: “while the relation between economic location and
political consciousness has never been straightforward, the fact that
there is low income/low wealth support for Labour, which does not
overlap completely with manual occupations, suggests that the
‘burgeoning middle classes’ of service sector workers, predominantly
women, identified by Ipsos Connect, are a significant but unacknowledged
part of working class support for Labour.”

Further suggesting the inadequacies of the reactionary form of class
politics being advocated against the left, as argued by Immolations, is
how the politics being offered by the Labour right, are precisely those
politics which have alienated Labour from traditional working class
communities, arguing“I’ve always had a deeply ingrained sense that,
rather than Wales abandoning the Labour Party, the Labour party had
abandoned Wales.” Corbynism, by contrast, at least offers some hope of
re-engaging with these communities -- “for many of us, this was a vote
for Corbyn - not our local MP, not the Labour party. Part of what made
me so proud to go out and vote was that Corbyn and his allies had put
themselves on the line and offered something bolder, braver and more
exciting than anything I even imagined. They offered all this despite
the onslaught they have faced from the media, the political
establishment, and much of their own party. Deep down I felt that I’d
never have a chance to vote for somebody like this again. They’d been on
the right side of every battle in the past few decades regardless of the
consequences. Everything they had fought and stood for trumped any
reservations I held. I understand people’s enthusiasm. The last few
weeks have honestly been the only encouraging political events I’ve ever
lived through. There were points on the night of the election that I
found myself close to tears. I saw many people, who had been written off
as racists and as people who could only ever be won back by shifting to
the right, instead embrace left-wing politics. I had friends tell me
that I was defending people who were not worth defending – and yet in my
hometown a vote which gravitated from Labour to the Lib Dems in 2010,
and to UKIP in 2015, went directly back to Labour under Corbyn.” Indeed,
for Immolations at least one of the things barring the full reconnection
with these communities is the dead hand of the Labour establishment --
yet another reason to bring the party bureaucracy under democratic
control and direction. Jude Wanga’s account of Islington, like
Immolations’s account, and unlike the standard day trip that confirms
the writer’s boring worldview that usually passes for reporting of
reporting on areas of the UK, is rooted in long lived experience of the
place itself. It also opposes the reactionary construction of class
politics but this time by showing that Islington, a significantly
working class area, is not the same as the demonised “Islington” of
Labour’s reactionaries. As Wanga notes, “Blue Labour can only work by
holding onto a descriptor of the working class that no longer fits the
reality of working class Britain, Indeed a lot of the indicators for
affluent metropolitan areas - diverse, multicultural ignore the fact
that black and minority ethnics are the fastest growing subsection of
the working class. Given that black and minority ethnics are also the
lowest paid, and most likely to live in social housing or be in
precarious work or unemployed, the Blue Labour ideology neither reflects
nor accommodates this significant demographic.”. It has been great to
see Geraghty, Marie, Immolations, and Wanga’s pieces cited in arguments
against this reactionary version of class politics.

It cannot, however, of course, to say that there are no problems with
Corbynism’s class basis, there are spatial contradictions and embedded
forms of culture which produces a suspicion of socialist values in some
areas, particularly among older working class voters. The error (or
deliberate mystification) of Graham Jones, or whichever other
non-entity, is to both identify this with the whole of the working class
and claim this suspicion is stubbornly fixed. Tom Blackburn’s vital
essay “Corbynism from Below”, provides a strong account (and with it a
demand on party members to act and the Party to harness these
capacities) of “renewing labour movement culture for the 21st century,
and rebuilding bridges between the Labour Party and those working-class
communities which have been neglected by it for so long.” Edie Miller
also offers a valuable account, analysis and set of demands for a
campaigning that is rooted in a properly grasped idea of class interests
and how that can, itself, begin to construct a powerful unity with a
resurgence of class consciousness rooted in a vision, which is “not one
we are supposed to accept because we ‘like’ it, rather because we need
it; because austerity kills, and we cannot go on like this.”

A question then for us at New Socialist is what would an adequate class
politics be in 2017, and what would it mean to construct a unity of the
working class, as suggested by Marie, following Hall. This class
politics requires a unity that is both sufficient for political
effectiveness and attentive to the diversity of the working class and
does not, as in the Old Labour Right’s class politics, substitute a
privileged section of the working class for the working class as a
whole, and demand a form of unity which means an identification with the
culture, politics and economic interests of this section of the working
class from the whole. One aspect of constructing this politics as argued
by Marie and suggested by Eleanor White in her account of Grenfell
solidarity, is an expansion of the locations where class and class
politics is held operate that is beyond certain workplaces and workplace
struggles and, as Padmore argues, quoted in my piece, the resulting
political form of this “trade union consciousness”. This is not, though,
to disparage Trade Unions, and the limited sectional “trade union
consciousness” described by Padmore does not exhaust the political
consciousness or capacities of trade unionists. Trade Unionism can (and
needs to) move beyond a limited view of production and struggle to, as
Nadine Houghton argues: “being a union is not about providing a service,
BUT we can assist our members in dealing with issues that affect them
outside the workplace in a more organic and holistic way than we
currently do. Working people will have issues with immigration, housing
and debt. We could link our members together so that they can assist and
empower each other collectively within their own communities. Whether
that is through weekly drop in sessions, communal gatherings, skills
sharing sessions etc; addressing the needs of the whole worker, not just
the worker in the workplace. It would open up further organising leads
and win the trust of workers”.

For class politics, then, care, social reproduction, access to the means
of survival through welfare entitlements rather than being forced into
low-waged, unsuitable, exploitative work are all key. The question of
proletarianisation through the removal of welfare entitlements and the
struggle against this, which is strongly differentiated within the
working class with, for example, people with Learning
Disabilities/Difficulties, particularly affected as described in Chris
Blewitt’s essay. This forced “independence”, which is, of course,
anything but, notably, has politicised many people with LD, as Blewitt
argues, “the cracks within which people are allowed to slip can also be
fertile ground for resistance and response”. However, whilst the moment
of resistance is there, there is scepticism about Labour and Corbynism,
for correct reasons: “questions remain: one person this week said that
they believe the good intentions but will remain pretty unconvinced
until disabled people are mentioned as more than a side note.” To argue
for the positive side of political construction is also to argue for a
left project that is open to these criticisms and experiences, and
therefore to the people who have them.

The attention to wider life beyond a sharply delimited production and
politics also introduces into our understanding of class politics the
forms of working class community solidarity, resilience and mutual
support as described by White, in contrast to the middle class, “while
the generosity shown by people from normal, everyday working class
backgrounds was touching and powerful, what had the greatest impact on
me were those donations that came from those from stereotypically, white
middle-class people. The yummy mummy in her maroon coloured 4x4 Range
Rover to deliver bags of goods and as I was checking to see if they were
clean, I noticed blood stains on the bed sheets. These donations were
completely unacceptable”. As Raymond Williams argues, there is a chasm
between working class values of solidarity and co-operation and
middle-class individual advancement. Indeed, this too could be a
fundamental part of the Tory campaigns’ “narcissistic misrecognition”.
Here, of course, there is not a pure class position: community and
cultural relations are key, and, are themselves, made, and, as shown,
this can offer a basis for surprising politicisation, as White also
notes of a discussion, “I explained because every MP has to take a vow
of loyalty to the Queen and as Sinn Fein support Irish reunification and
an end to British imperialism in Ireland they wouldn't. He was kinda
shocked by this and said, "but I wouldn't want to do that for the Queen
when she's so filthy rich", along with him calling her an "inbred fuck"
and that he agreed with Sinn Fein because the British had been
"annoying" the Irish for too long”. It should also be noted, as Marie
does, how much this working class community mutual support is the
achievement and work of women, made absolutely apparent during the
miners’ strike: “a long-running industrial strike, for all the arguments
of those who presented the miners’ struggle as old-fashioned and purely
labourist, is also a point at which the barriers that had previously
separated labourist and reproductive struggles are broken. It reveals
how domestic labour supports, and is a condition of possibility for,
labour solidarity, as women, and the community as a whole, are required
to use their resourcefulness to extend provisioning, at the point where
men withdraw from earning the means of subsistence. This extension is
achieved through socialising these tasks within the community, but with
the subsequent result of politicising whole sections of it in ways
beyond previously contained labourist and economistic struggles”.
Furthermore, as Marie argues, a large part of the explanation for
working class women voting Corbyn may be found in their response to a
crisis in social reproduction. This, of course, is the terrain for a
kinder, gentler politics, or what I described as a populism of need, and
it can include anger at those both responsible for destroying this
social fabric and at those whose comfortable position means they will
never feel the consequences of it. The kinder, gentler politics here, as
Suze Marsupial argues, is entirely compatible with rudeness. All of
these experiences and forms also demand a transformed Labour Party, a
task which Corbyn was involved with in the 1980s, and which continues
today.

An appropriate form of class politics for today must be internationalist
(and it always has been). This also requires, a critique of how
imperialism creates and resolves contradictions “at home”, that is, as
with Satnam Virdee’s argument, quoted in my essay, a challenge that the
often racially exclusive political organisation and consciousness of the
working class within Britain. One possible drift of Corbynism is into
being, as parts of the manifesto suggest, the politics of the left edge
of the Old Labour Right, a class politics bounded by nationality and
race. Even if its instincts on these questions are generous, and even if
it can be pushed leftwards to a fair degree, such a politics is
necessarily limited and is necessarily a politics of incorporating
sections of the working class into society’s existing purposes and
forms. An appropriate form of class politics today also, whilst
absolutely dismissive of the patronising and racist dogwhistles in the
construction of “Islington” and Corbyn as a metropolitan elitist, must
be attentive to the UK’s spatial contradictions and combined but
increasingly uneven development. It must, therefore, avoid the
resentments that within the Blue Labour tendency are unfolded in deeply
reactionary ways around one form of London as a “Global City”, that is
London as a global city of people, while absolutely grasping the
destructive effects of London in its other “Global City” mode: London as
a global city of capital. Whilst analytically these two facets of London
cannot be distinguished, not least because one major reason for
immigration is the looting of the Global South by big capital and the
sucking up of wealth by the City, they can and must be politically
distinguished.

These issues add questions of economic and constitutional geography to
what class politics should be. As Tony Benn argued, constitutional
questions are class questions, “we cannot use the institutions and
cultures devised by another class, in another period, for another
purpose, to meet our needs in our age for our purposes and we have got
to be more fundamental in our approach.” Again the subordinate,
apolitical tendency of the British labour movement perhaps explains some
of its failings, as Benn laments, to address these questions. Within
constitutional questions broadly conceived, there is both Immolations’s
concern that, “issues will be sidelined by a form of left activism that
is predominantly centred in England’s urban conurbations, and most
prominently in London”, and the particular constitutional-imperialist
legacy in the Northern Ireland. As Rosa Gilbert argues, “What is
striking about the potential for the DUP to be propping up the flailing
Tory government is that is encapsulates the utter constitutional mess of
the post-conflict settlement in Northern Ireland. More significantly, it
demonstrates how the continued British occupation of Ireland is a
hindrance to socialism across these islands. As the maxim goes, a nation
that oppresses another can never itself be free”. Questions around
Northern Ireland were, of course, weaponised irresponsibility,
ignorantly, as McFall argues in the election campaign and as Eleanor
White argues, these imperialist legacies do particular harm to women
across the island of Ireland.

The economics side of the expanded class politics theme is becoming a
particular strength of New Socialist. The most read essay from our
election special was Joe Guinan and Thomas Hanna’s “Full Corbynism”
which, importantly, insists on addressing the regional contradictions
and inequalities produced by Britain’s capitalism. With parallels with
Hilary Wainwright’s arguments for an economics of need where the sites
of economics and of class politics are expanded beyond a narrow concern
over distribution whether in Fabian technocracy or Trade Union
sectionalism, Guinan and Hanna also emphasis the centrality of
democratic control over production, again this a class politics of
expanded, non-sectional, locations. These questions, moreover, will be
crucial in a wider sense within Corbynism where many policy areas have
an ambiguity between a better form of existing policy, but nevertheless
remain within the existing consensus, and a qualitatively different set
of politics. Guinan and Hanna also note how it is absolutely essential
to distinguish arguments against the free movement of capital, which is
essential to constructing a left political (that is concerned with
questions of power) economy, from arguments against the free movement of
people.

Guinan and Hanna’s also, crucially explores a question we have been
aiming address from a range of perspectives, of how could a left
programme be implemented. For Guinan and Hanna, there is a likelihood
that “‘The roof will fall in’, warns Ray McAnally as radical Labour
Prime Minister Harry Perkins in A Very British Coup. Capital flight,
investment strikes, foreign exchange crises, trade retaliation – all are
possible, whether as market reactions or deliberately administered
punishment beatings”. And in the near future we may have a number of
pieces on A Very British Coup. It also entails, most notably argued for
in Blackburn’s “Corbynism from Below” the development of forms of
popular power to make implementing a left programme possible. It also
involves, as suggested in our editorials on conference and “A Vow of
Silence?” the extension of party democracy. It has often been noted,
most notably in The May Day Manifesto and by Hilary Wainwright that a
lack of internal democracy is a significant part of the integration of
Labour, through the obedience of the PLP, not to the membership, but to
interests of the state and capital, into the purposes of existing
society. Class politics, party democracy, Labour and the state,
constitutional reform and a Corbynite economics are all themes we will
aim to develop in the months to come.

Finally, some thanks. Firstly, we want to thank all our subscribers, not
only for the money, which is now allowing us to pay writers for their
work, but also for the show of confidence and support in the work we are
doing which means such a lot. We’d also like to thank all the writers
who contributed, for free, to our election coverage. We would also be
very happy for any of them to write for us again, especially now with
the generous support of our subscribers we can pay them. Lastly, we want
to thank every single comrade involved in the Corbyn project. It is this
movement that means New Socialist is not just an abstractly theoretical
effort, but one that is inspired to, and has a connection with the
practical forces which have the potential to, transform society.
