It Was a Fantasy: Centrist Political Commentators in the Age of Corbynism
=========================================================================

by [Tom Mills](https://twitter.com/ta_mills)

This is an article about a small group of well connected, highly
educated and handsomely paid political commentators who convinced
themselves that they understood the governing laws of electoral
politics.

But this was a fantasy. What they had in fact done was to parrot the
operating assumptions of the neoliberal faction of the Labour Party,
which whilst electorally successful for a time, proved to be ruinous in
the medium term.

But this did not matter. They had discovered that since the platforms
for respected left-wing political commentary in the UK are so few, as
long as they adopted a sagacious tone, they could write whatever they
wanted, no matter how incoherent.

Their editors simply went along with it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In case it wasn’t obvious, I've no great fondness for Jonathan
Freedland, Polly Toynbee, Martin Kettle, John Rentoul - and the rest.
But I do think there’s something interesting, as well as infuriating,
about Britain’s Blairite and centrist political commentators. How has
this elitist clique been able to maintain its eminence within British
public life, despite having so little political insight and
understanding, let alone foresight?

There’s no great mystery as to why ‘third way’ politics appealed to
these people. They are all from the cohort that experienced the
demoralising electoral defeats of the long 1980s; from the class –
capitalists aside – that most benefited materially from its policies;
and from the narrower class strata that was in the driving seat
politically and culturally during the Blair-Brown era. But why were they
not able to come to terms with the implosion of that political project
almost a decade ago? Why were they not able to get to grips with the
political realignments that followed, or to anticipate the remarkable
successes of the Corbyn project?

Building on the Marxist theory of ideology, the sociologist Karl
Mannheim wrote that ‘diverse interpretations of the world’, if examined
sociologically, will ‘reveal themselves as the intellectual expressions
of conflicting groups struggling for power’. For Mannheim this included
not just classes, ‘but also generations, status groups, sects,
occupational groups, schools, etc.’ [^post-3-1] In the case of the
centrist and Blairite political commentators, their interpretation of
the world is aligned with the interests and operating assumptions of a
particular subset of the political class with whom they are networked
politically and socially. Ed Griffiths has sketched out the ideology of
what he calls ‘Moderate Labourism’
[here](http://www.edmundgriffiths.com/modlab.html). But in narrower
electoral terms, the central assumption shared by these political
actors, and the commentators aligned to them, is that the only viable
route to power for the left is a mix of a savvy communication strategy,
strategic targeting of middle-class voters in marginal constituencies
and ‘triangulation’ in response to the forces of reaction.

This was, to be fair, a fairly convincing argument for a short period.
Whilst the centrist commentariats’ elite constituency was able to
deliver on these terms, the ideas they propagated seemed to have some
cogency. But as the ‘third way’ political project collapsed in the wake
of the global financial crisis of 2007-08, its ideologues have found
themselves increasingly unable to make sense of the world. Why? Because
their supposed expertise was based on contingent political conditions
that no longer exist. What they have offered in the pages and webpages
of *the Guardian*, *the Independent* and *the New Statesman* never
represented a genuine understanding of politics and society. Rather; it
was a kind of embedded expertise which, in changed political conditions,
no longer has any analytical purchase.

Tony Blair had not, as his supporters like to imagine, mastered the art
of politics through communicative acumen and a savvy electoral strategy
– the two central qualities said to be lacking in Corbyn and his team.
Rather, he and his coterie of ‘modernisers’ had enthusiastically adapted
to the defeats of the left and the organised working class, and the
prevailing balance of forces that crystallised within the political
sphere in the wake of these defeats. Whilst they certainly developed
expertise in navigating this terrain, these skills were neither
transferable nor politically neutral. Unsurprisingly given the
circumstances of their political ascendency, the Blairites did not seek
to reverse those defeats by attempting to revive the institutions of
social democracy, or by strengthening a social base that might shift
back the balance of power within the political sphere. Their power and
prominence, after all, relied on these very conditions. Instead, New
Labour built up a constituency largely beyond the labour movement and
Labour’s natural support base. Blair, Brown and Mandelson assiduously
courted the financial elites and built up a secretive network of super
rich donors  to sidestep the financial power of the trade unions. They
fostered networks of policy expertise in corporate funded think tanks,
as well as a coterie of advisers and consultants which would serve as an
alternative to the more democratic policy procedures of the party.

In the medium term this was suicidal for the Labour Party and was more
than a capitulation to the forces of capital – which had long
characterised the politics of mainstream Labourism. It was a political
project built on the exhausted infrastructure of social democracy and
the corporate networks that had been strengthened and reconstituted by
Thatcherism. The latter included financial capital, of course, but most
of all the professional influencers – the advertisers, lobbyists, PRs
and political consultants who thrived in the post-democratic milieu of
neoliberal Britain. It was within these networks that the Blairite
‘common sense’ at the heart of the contemporary British centrist myth
was formed. The involvement of Portland Communications in the ‘chicken
coup’, dismissed by some on the left as conspiracism, was indicative of
this grouping at the heart of the Blairite project. Moderate Labourism,
or at least the Blairism at its core, should therefore not be understood
merely as an ideology in the sense of being a worldview. It is also the
habitus of a group of political professionals and intermediaries in the
increasingly incestuous worlds of business, media and politics, and
reflects a particular set of interests around which they cohere.

The centrist political pundits, whose lack of insight has been so
starkly exposed by this General Election, are an adjunct to this
grouping. They operate within the same social circles and have formed a
symbiotic relationship with this group and the broader professional
political classes - exchanging ideas and trading legitimacy. In doing
so, they mistook a strategic adaptation to the balance of forces in the
political field in a particular moment, for a timeless formula for
left-wing politics, and an acquaintance with this strategy, and its
strategists, for political insight. This is why their response to
Corbynism has been such a curious mix of belligerence and condescension.
Its radicalism threatens not only the political status quo, but the
purveyors of political wisdom who have built their reputation around it.

[^post-3-1]: Karl Mannheim, *Ideology and Utopia; An Introduction to the
    Sociology of Knowledge*, London, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1966,
    pp.241, 248.
