Reflections from Wales
======================

by [immolations](https://twitter.com/immolations)

I’ve always had a deeply ingrained sense that, rather than Wales
abandoning the Labour Party, the Labour party had abandoned Wales. I’ve
often mentioned the statement my late grandfather once said to me:
“Thatcher hated us, but to Blair we don’t even exist.” To be hated is
better than being forgotten. Blair promised and delivered devolution
towards the end of the last millennium, and there was a feeling that
Wales was enjoying a civic rebirth with its new political powers and
landmark events like hosting the Rugby World Cup - but the social and
economic promises never came true.

Unlike Scotland, Wales has historically lacked its own civic
institutions and political culture. Wales’s place in the United Kingdom
was born from occupation, not a personal union between two kingdoms.
Attempts were made to erase the Welsh language over centuries through
the forced use of English practices and institutions. It’s little
surprise that the Welsh Assembly and later Welsh Government, run by
Labour with occasional coalitions with the nationalists Plaid Cymru
(made up of a plethora of different groups but often pushing a more
left-wing and progressive manifesto than Labour), has come to act more
like a monolithic county council than a national government. It has
lacked direction and arguably struggled to represent Wales due to the
country’s poverty, lack of political structures and widespread political
disenfranchisement.

Despite predictions to the contrary before the general election, Wales
was never going to go blue. There was so little evidence of support for
the Tories on the ground. Typically, the young detest them and are
deeply angry about Brexit. The old, especially in Labour heartlands,
still have a deep hatred of them which has been enforced over
generations. Indeed, South Wales is one of the the few places in the
world where you will hear people talk of Churchill with total disdain
after what his policies did for the Welsh economy and his reaction to
the Tonypandy riots. Wales is a country where the scars from these old
battles are on display in the landscape and in its social fabric, from
the desolate factories and steep coal tips to the poverty that blights
so many of its towns.

The last few months I have been trying to juggle the conflicting
projects of Welsh independence and fighting for a hypothetical United
Kingdom government. Deep down, I still feel that Wales would be
sidelined and forgotten under any socialist UK government. For all
Corbyn’s good will and ideas, the political structure of the UK has
marginalized us for decades. It’s not something he can change alone and
I still have many doubts about those underneath him. The images of just
two Labour MPs discussing the Wales Bill in 2016 make me furious.

Of course, these kinds of issues are never discussed by many on the left
or by Welsh activists. Instead, you read all sorts of attacks on working
class supporters of alternative parties. Supporters of the Scottish
Nationalist Party are often mocked, despite them being able to point to
many positive material changes in their own lives brought about by the
SNP. The shift of the Scottish Labour Party to the right cannot be
ignored. They point at the SNP MP Mhairi Black’s statement that she
would choose an Independent Scotland over a Socialist UK Government as
evidence that her party aren’t actually left wing, when so many people I
know with the deepest left-wing convictions would agree with her.

I am still deeply concerned about the direction of the Welsh Labour
Party and how they rule Wales. A party which has cowered away from
challenging Theresa May on Brexit or speaking out about many of the ‘big
issues of the day’ found it easy enough to separate themselves from
Corbyn. Wales’ First Minister, Carwyn Jones, a man who has so little
fight in him and only seems to generate feelings of apathy from people I
speak to, was quick to join the Labour right in criticising Corbyn. They
voted against left-wing bills, proposed by Plaid Cymru, that later
featured in the Labour manifesto. They kept Corbyn off campaign
materials and deliberately distanced themselves from him. Even now, some
people are attributing the Labour surge in Wales to this tactic, when it
was Labour’s manifesto that did it.

I think perhaps my biggest fear now is that these issues will be
sidelined by a form of left activism that is predominantly centred in
England’s urban conurbations, and most prominently in London. Already
the focus of discussion has, perhaps rightly, moved to winning a
parliamentary majority with a narrative that almost every seat is up for
grabs. While this might be true, it diverts attention away from the
struggles within the Labour party and enforces the same focus on
marginals across the south of England that has blighted the UK for
decades. For many of us, this was a vote for Corbyn - not our local MP,
not the Labour party. Part of what made me so proud to go out and vote
was that Corbyn and his allies had put themselves on the line and
offered something bolder, braver and more exciting than anything I even
imagined. They offered all this despite the onslaught they have faced
from the media, the political establishment, and much of their own
party. Deep down I felt that I’d never have a chance to vote for
somebody like this again. They’d been on the right side of every battle
in the past few decades regardless of the consequences. Everything they
had fought and stood for trumped any reservations I held.

I understand people’s enthusiasm. The last few weeks have honestly been
the only encouraging political events I’ve ever lived through. There
were points on the night of the election that I found myself close to
tears. I saw many people, who had been written off as racists and as
people who could only ever be won back by shifting to the right, instead
embrace left-wing politics. I had friends tell me that I was defending
people who were not worth defending – and yet in my hometown a vote
which gravitated from Labour to the Lib Dems in 2010, and to UKIP in
2015, went directly back to Labour under Corbyn. It feels like the grip
of neoliberalism on political discourse hasn’t just weakened but has
totally fallen apart. Frankly, things are now being discussed which I
thought would never be discussed. What was once impossible is now a
regular feature of conversation.

But we can’t get lost in this elation. The UK has a rapidly changing
political structure with many devolved bodies at city, regional and
national level gaining new powers. Many of these are run by the Labour
party. For me to fully embrace this Labour party, activists must also
turn their attention to ensuring these bodies embrace the politics
championed by Corbyn and remain sensitive to the differences that exist
with different parts of the United Kingdom. An acknowledgement that many
Labour councils are not good is simply not enough.

I won’t be joining the Labour party at this time. While I acknowledge
the argument that I should join, and fight to shift Welsh Labour left
and embrace the politics I’ve spoken of, I simply cannot see any method
of doing so. There is no clear kernel or cause I can direct my energy
towards. It feels like a political dead end. It’s perhaps a sad
reflection that I simply don’t think a change is possible without more
direction and input from those in London, whether that be Corbyn,
activists or left wing media. Wales is forced to make appeals to London,
desperately pleading for a chance to be recognized and represented –
like we’ve done for hundreds of years.

*We would welcome responses to this piece, on how its challenge may be
addressed by the labour movement both in and outside Wales and whether
the experiences discussed here are shared by other comrades in Wales and
beyond. Email newsocialisteditors@gmail.com*
