The State of the New PLP
========================

by [oidptg](https://twitter.com/oidptg)

A hugely significant but largely unremarked upon aspect of last
Thursday’s election result is the fact that the parliamentary left has
grown, not just as an overall number but also as a proportion of
Parliamentary Labour Party (PLP).

To be clear, this took many of us by surprise. Those of us monitoring
the expedited seat selection process overseen by the NEC were quickly
dismayed, if not surprised, by the apparent domination of moderate
candidates. Successes such as the selection of Dan Carden in Liverpool
Wavertree and Laura Pidcock in North West Durham were overshadowed by
the selection of a number of candidates openly hostile to Corbyn and
Corbynism in safe seats vacated by MPs standing down. Concerns grew that
the PLP would, following the election, be even less reflective of the
membership.

What we (and the party machinery?) had missed however was the number of
solidly pro-Corbyn and left candidates selected in what we then thought
were unwinnable seats.

The Selection Process
---------------------

The opaque, centralised selection process undertaken for the snap
election was the source of great frustration for many members and
potential candidates. It must not be repeated. However, given the
obviously precarious nature of Theresa May’s nascent ‘Coalition of
Chaos’ with the DUP, we should anticipate and prepare for another
election within a year and possibly even before year’s end. This compels
Labour to learn one electoral lesson from the Liberal Democrats: picking
candidates early and embedding them in their seats.

Those candidates that ran the Tories incredibly close last week, often
despite scant allocation of central resources — such as in Chingford and
Woodford Green (as explored in an
[interview](https://newsocialist.org.uk/the-red-tide-hits-chingford/)for
the NS yesterday) — will of course have a good claim to stand again.
Either way, local party members must be involved in the selection
process. As [Aaron Bastani](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wXHW6CaZ7UM)
astutely observed in April, the direct involvement of the membership in
selections not only confers legitimacy upon the successful candidate, it
engages members and increases the likelihood that they will actually get
out and campaign regardless of whether the candidate shares their
politics.

The New Left Intake
-------------------

For all its glaring deficiencies the 2017 process would go on to provide
the left and pro-Corbyn candidates that delivered some of the more
remarkable wins of the night, including Marsha de Cordova in Battersea
and the very last result to be declared, Emma Dent Coad’s spectacular
win in Kensington.

It is significant that a number of these new MPs are very young by
common parliamentary standards. Putting the personal popularity of the
leadership team to one side, it is obviously imperative that the party
can better reflect its increasingly youthful membership and electoral
base. These new MPs, if supported by the party, the older generation of
MPs and the membership, can play a huge part in that.

The new left intake also includes some old hands in the form of two
‘returnees’: David Drew in Stroud (MP from 1997-2010), a Campaign Group
member who nominated John McDonnell for the leadership in 2007 and the
strongly pro-Corbyn Chris Williamson in Derby North (2010-2015).

The newly-elected MPs will take up their seats alongside a number of
incumbent left MPs who were thought to be at risk of losing their seats,
such as Margaret Greenwood in Wirral West, Clive Lewis in Norwich South
and Cat Smith in Lancaster and Fleetwood. All were returned with greatly
increased majorities.

Further, none of the five seats sadly lost to the Tories were held in
the last Parliament by pro-Corbyn MPs, although Tom Blenkinsop’s
replacement as a candidate in Middlesbrough South and Cleveland, Tracy
Harvey, was an enthusiastic Corbyn supporter.

There are other talented new members such as MEP Anneliese Dodds in
Oxford East and NUT official Emma Hardy in Alan Johnson’s old seat Hull
West and Hessle, who might reasonably be described as being on the ‘left
of the soft left’. Another returnee, John Grogan, could comfortably be
placed in this category. The positioning of these new MPs and the soft
left in general in relation to the leadership in coming weeks will be
worth watching closely.

The McDonnell Amendment
-----------------------

Pre-election discussions around whether a hypothetical Corbyn successor
would reach the current nomination of threshold of 15% of the PLP have
been rendered moot — in the short term at least. Corbyn’s leadership
position is now as strong as Theresa May’s is weak. Prominent Labour MPs
who spent much of the general election campaign gearing up for a
leadership challenge must now stoop to lobbying in the media for
Corbyn’s preferment in his imminent reshuffle.

Stephen Bush (of the lesser NS) has speculated that the enlarged left
now exceeds the nomination threshold. Our initial analysis, to be
published at a later date, suggests that this might be a slightly
optimistic reading. EIther way, this does not mean that the so-called
[‘McDonnell
amendment’](http://www.leftfutures.org/2017/04/for-the-mcdonnell-amendment/)
— seeking to lower the nomination threshold for leadership contests from
15% of the PLP to 5% — should not be pursued. Indeed, we reiterated its
importance in our [post-election
editorial](https://newsocialist.org.uk/this-is-just-the-beginning-corbynisms-next-steps/)
and will work to see it passed at this year’s conference in Brighton. If
Corbyn’s leadership has taught us one thing it’s that the PLP must not
be allowed to limit the membership’s choice to a meagre field of barely
indistinguishable technocrats.

The embittered, increasingly marginalised Progress wing of the party,
while implacably opposed to the amendment now, will thank us in the
future when the lower nomination threshold enables their unreconstructed
Blairite of choice to scrape onto the ballot, to poll under 5% again.

The Immediate Role of the Parliamentary Left
--------------------------------------------

A reshuffle is imminent, which at the very least will be used to plug
the handful of gaps left by those who stood down before June. This is
also an opportunity to elevate those who had strong campaigns, to bring
talented MPs who resigned over Article 50 back into the fold and
possibly give some of the newly elected left MPs junior shadow or PPS
roles.

[Early
indications](http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/staggers/2017/06/whos-job-jeremy-corbyns-new-shadow-cabinet)
are that Corbyn will resist the calls to reappoint the square pegs of
media designated “big beasts” such as Yvette Cooper (or media
constructions such as “Dan Jarvis”) into the round holes of his shadow
cabinet. This, if proven to be true, is welcome. Amid some hysterical
calls for “party unity”, the basic fact that MPs who plainly do not
support the direction the party has taken under Corbyn simply cannot be
trusted should not be forgotten.

He will reportedly favour those who, regardless of their personal
politics, demonstrated loyalty in the execution of their shadow
ministerial responsibilities over the last few crucial months. This is
welcome and will provide a riposte to those who weaponise the notion of
Labour as a “broad church” in a transparent attempt to promote their
narrow sectional interests and their attendant foot soldiers within the
PLP. One possible exception to this is Ed Miliband, who supported Owen
Smith’s candidacy last summer, but has been notably less hostile than
many others and was reportedly impressed with the radicalism of Corbyn’s
manifesto, when compared against his 2015 effort.

A number of the newly elected MPs, and not just those on the left, bring
to Westminster significant prior expertise and ideas. There are several
whose immediate elevation into shadow roles would not be unwelcome.
Could Emma Dent Coad’s experience as a [councillor and housing
campaigner](http://emmadentcoad.blogspot.co.uk/) in inner London be
brought to bear to reinforce Labour’s position on the construction of
new social housing? Might Marsha de Cordova's work as a disability
activist inform our shadow work and pensions team and build upon
Labour’s promising, if partial, [manifesto with and for disabled
people](http://www.labour.org.uk/page/-/manifesto-for-disabled-people.PDF)?
Could Hugh Gaffney, who evoked Keir Hardie by [wearing his Parcelforce
shirt](https://www.facebook.com/HughGaffneyLabour/posts/1690649911240301)
as he arrived at Parliament for his first day as an MP, be deployed to
front Labour’s calls for the renationalisation of Royal Mail?

Those not brought into the fold at this early stage will have plenty of
other opportunities to make an impact as they establish their offices
and the normal course of Parliament resumes. Parliament, while
institutionally weighted toward the executive (including minority or
fragile coalition governments), provides a number of ‘policy venues’ for
even the most inexperienced and unknown of opposition backbenchers to
frustrate, scrutinise and expose the government.

Once the government’s legislative programme is revealed MPs will set to
work in bill committees and in the chamber to dilute, amend or destroy
bills. The membership of influential departmental select committees will
be determined shortly. It would be desirable, for example, to see a
Labour MP who firmly supports rail renationalisation elected as chair of
the Transport Select Committee. All-party parliamentary groups (APPGs),
while frequently used as naked promotional vehicle for trade lobbies or
foreign governments, are often also established in conjunction with
campaign groups and charities and give backbenchers another mechanism to
promote important causes and lead to changes to legislation.

NS and Mainstream Political Journalism
--------------------------------------

That the parliamentary busy work described above goes largely unnoticed
does not negate its importance. If Corbynism is to deliver on its
promise then it obviously will be realised in part through parliamentary
action, both in opposition and in government.

The arcane nature of Parliament does not lend itself to popular
discussion. This is exacerbated by a class of political journalists who
are immune to the impact of the policies that emanate from our political
institutions and use their access to present politics through the narrow
frames of strategy and personality.

The example of Corbyn perfectly demonstrates this. Scores of
journalists, disinclined to treat the Corbyn phenomena with the critical
perspective it always deserved, transformed themselves into unthinking
vessels for the transmission of anonymous smears and insults by its
opponents. Many journalists on the nominal left, for reasons now
outlined in torturous *mea culpas*, took to parroting the same attacks
put forward by Corbyn’s opponents. What is now obvious is that
regardless of how they saw themselves politically these journalists had
cohered around a single incredibly narrow perspective. This encompassed
the aforementioned fixation with personality (“Corbyn is weak and
unelectable”) and a sort of half-baked Blairite electoralism (an
obsession with polling, a misplaced belief in the political power of
their own dying medium, a complete lack of faith in the voting public
and an emphasis on appealing to an imagined “Middle England” above all
else).

While the appalling pre-election predictions and think pieces put out by
these commentators certainly deserve our ridicule, their true failure
lies not in failing to accurately predict the result — few did — but in
refusing to examine and understand the appeal of Corbyn and Corbynism.
Their journalism, in as far as it can be described as such, is coloured
by disdain and a frankly staggering lack of intellectual curiosity. The
book eaters and UKIP-shills of British political science, as [Jonathan
Dean](https://www.psa.ac.uk/insight-plus/blog/do-academics-have-corbyn-problem)
correctly identified last year, suffer from much the same problem and
have incurred significant reputational damage as a result.

That our media is (with a few glimmering exceptions) utterly moribund;
that there is a need and a space for just plain *better* coverage of
Westminster and our politics more generally should, by now, be
self-evident.

NS will be reporting on the first contributions of the new left MPs and
inviting them to contribute where possible. We have compiled a Twitter
list of the new MPs understood to be on the left. We encourage our
readers to follow and engage with them.

Our [statement of intent](https://newsocialist.org.uk/westminster/) in
regard to Westminster coverage commits us to “highlight and celebrate
the contribution of left parliamentarians”. We are pleased that this
task, given their increased number, might prove more difficult than we
had anticipated.
