The Hegemon Crack'd
===================

by [David Beer](https://twitter.com/davidgbeer)

After the election result I couldn’t help being reminded of the classic
TV show Columbo. It played out a little like that. Underestimated due to
his ruffled demeanour the lead character catches-out his arrogant
adversary, unstitched by their sense of superiority. Despite being a fan
of Columbo, for me, like many others, this election result came as
something of a surprise. This result simply seemed beyond the edges of
possibility – that was before the exit poll changed things.

In anticipation of the results I’d reread Walter Benjamin’s 1931 essay
‘Left-Wing Melancholy’ – where he takes a swipe at a detached and
distant intellectual milieu. Printed and stapled on my desk, ready for
reading on Friday morning, was a copy of Wendy Brown’s 1999 article
[‘Resisting left
melancholy’](http://www.commonhouse.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/brown-melancholia-of-the-left.pdf)
I was thinking I might need some resources for thinking about potential
political futures, post-liberal times and the closing down of viable
alternatives. The election delivered a rather different lesson, a lesson
about the problems of political certainty.

If we take the closing predictions of the polls they make for startling
reading. Far from offering any kind of certainty they actually revealed
just how uncertain things were. The eight key polling companies
predicted a lead for the Conservatives ranging from 1-13% - with
Survation on 1% and BMG on 13%. Of course, in the current political
system, overall vote share means little anyway – other than giving a
sense of the overall direction of views. The apparent obsession with the
polls, especially on social media, is perhaps really a symptom of
something else. People’s lack of a sense of certainty about the future
means that they turn to the polls for a fleeting snapshot of solidity.
It makes sense. As the sands shift we want to try to work out where we
stand. The result of either a faith in the numbers or a faith in the
political orthodoxy means that many [commentators and
politicians](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jun/13/election-tories-media-broadcasters-press-jeremy-corbyn)
are now having to backtrack with some haste. Hegemony is cracking under
the pressure – as shown by the [recent
discussions](https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jun/11/the-day-the-myths-of-press-power-and-the-centre-ground-died)
of the apparent inability of the right wing press to dictate the terms
of the election – shafts of light are shining through.

In the aftermath of the election, as I write this piece, the future
looks quite different to the one we might have pictured only a few days
ago. The bookends of possibility have been forced outwards. Concerns,
rightly, were of the emergence of an unchecked [one party
state](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/11/opinion/theresa-mays-vapid-vision-for-a-one-party-state.html?_r=0).
Right now, as the government stitches together a fragile looking support
agreement, the political situation could hardly look less certain.

*The Guardian* columnist Aditya Chakraborty suggested after the election
that we are moving into a new age of authenticity – fuelled by a kind of
anti-technocratic sentiment. This seems like a particularly telling
account of what is going on. We seem to also be moving into a period of
unpredictability. The circumstances of this unpredictability are
wide-ranging. There are a number of cross-cutting currents that are hard
to diagnose or tie down in any simple summary. In fact, I think the
problems come when we try to reduce these shifts into something that can
be readily packaged or where we are too fixed in our analysis of these
trends or the outcomes that we predict. Understanding is crucial but
theories that overlook the variegated and uneven nature of the issues
are likely to stumble. It’s crucial to try to capture the mood, to
conceptualise social problems, to identify driving forces and to locate
the movements of power, but the mistake is to approach these with
anything close to certainty in their purity and accuracy. This is
particularly pointed when it comes to trying to predict the future.
Visions of the future can provoke action but they can also limit the
range of possibilities, so they need to be handled with care.

This might seem bleak, but in this case unpredictability and uncertainty
are unleashing new horizons of possibility. Imaginations are being
unblocked. The unforeseeable opens up the imagination and provides the
space for alternatives to be cultivated. The general election may have
produced an unclear outcome and an uncertain future, but it has also
brought a renewed sense of possibility. In the fog of uncertainty that
this election has spluttered, one thing has become very clear. We don’t
seem to know people or society quite as well as we thought we did. There
are benefits to this realisation. It means that we are able to use this
moment to [dream up possible
futures](https://www.opendemocracy.net/transformation/david-beer/four-futures-life-after-capitalism)
that stretch far beyond those that we could conceivably have harboured
only last week. These imagined futures are now unhampered by the limits
of orthodoxy or a narrow sense of possibility. I’d suggest that we turn
to eclectic resources to inspire and provoke [those imagined
futures](https://www.thesociologicalreview.com/blog/brexit-how-do-we-reimagine.html).
Informed by those resources we should not be too dogmatic about our
ideas or too fixed in our visions of where we are heading. Certainty may
be best avoided, for the moment at least. Accepting the unpredictability
of things leaves us with far more space to think. As Colombo would
remind us, asking one more question is always a good idea.
