Pragmatics for Pragmatists
==========================

by [Suze Marsupial](https://twitter.com/SuzeMarsupial)

‘Fucking melt’, ‘salt the slugs’, ‘absolutely bodied by the absolute
boy’. The left internet at the peak of the election was alive with a
raucous glee unprecedented in my adult life. Ironic and reckless and
outrageously grotesque. The young left is hopeful and disgusting,
argumentative yet strangely united. Full of rudeness, revenge and
revolting energy. And in a tale as old as language, youth, and politics
itself, the establishment response to this strange sea change has been
partly expressed as word panic.

Why would you call someone a ‘melt’? Because it is hilarious. Because
insulting those who condescend you is exhilarating. [Because you are
following a Stalinist tactic of linguistic dehumanisation of your
opponent](https://twitter.com/LowQualityRegen/status/861859889525784576).
Many answers have been proposed. Another one might be, ‘why does it
matter?’. Only the latter is totally and unambiguously useless. Language
is always important. Language is not just who we are, it is what gives
us a fabric in which to be ourselves, and be with others, in conflict or
in solidarity.

The rapid coining or popularising of politicised slang within the broad
online movement to elect Jeremy Corbyn has inspired a reaction from
liberal and centrist commentators, from establishment journalists and
political mouthpieces has a noticeably different tone from other recent
political language debates. Professionals whose livelihood is in large
part the business of words and their manipulation profess themselves at
a loss, not just regarding what these new words mean, but why anybody
would use such slang in the first place.

Often the very same voices who have been lecturing the young and
politically engaged for years on the merits of a rowdy and rude
discourse (and beneficently protected this right by consistently
championing access to youth controlled spaces for all the most
[intellectually
bankrupt](http://www.spiked-online.com/newsite/article/campus-censorship-its-worse-than-you-think-but-there-is-hope/17937#.WUZCreuGPIV)
[transphobes](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/20/university-debate-gag-free-speech-rights-transgender-muslim-gay)
and
[racists](https://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2015/02/i-wouldnt-vote-for-marine-le-pen-but-i-can-see-why-french-voters-might/#))
are suddenly excessively concerned about rudeness and its harms. Is this
the Cartesian u-turn? Are we now at a point where the mainstream
recognises that speech is a material act? At the very least words are
being taken seriously again.

Language is Magic
-----------------

Like so many phenomena thrown up by this election, none of this is
precisely new. As the young and the left increasingly unite, the tide of
confusion and obfuscation of online politics has pulled back a little,
exposing many of the coalescing central tensions of the last decade of
British politics. The bafflement at being ‘absolutely bodied’ emerges
from a broader cultural crisis around the political status of speech.
There is no single ripchord to pull to disentangle all analyses of power
and language, in this essay or anywhere else. What follows is one
possible lens on these phenomena, based on my own perspective and
preoccupations. Let’s talk about language and magic.

Soon after the election, Guido Fawkes published a [“guide to speaking
like a
Corbynista”](https://order-order.com/2017/06/13/learn-to-speak-corbynista-with-guidos-slang-dictionary/).
Packaged as humorous parody, the post was remarkably without satire.
Mostly, it is a list of some recently popular leftist slang terms
associated strongly with the movement to elect Corbyn, accompanied by
fairly accurate functional definitions, and the names of some people
famous for using them. The only apparent satirical editorialising is to
the effect that leftists are all authoritarian, which is hardly
groundbreaking stuff. But what if this is not a case of failing in its
purpose as satire, but of having another function entirely. What if the
Corbynista slang guide is not a failed attempt at humour, but a
successful demystification exercise? Not a guide for talking like a
Corbynista in jest, but for listening to them sincerely.

We all know in our bones that language is magic. That there may be no
special linguistic forms that are distinguished as ‘spells’, but that
every exchange of words with another human being -no matter how mundane-
is an incantation. Language is humanity’s most accessible and powerful
tool for plugging the ethereal into the material, and making the
intangible manifest. Theoretical linguistics recognises this too, albeit
in different, less metaphorical, terms.
[Grice](http://www.communicationcache.com/uploads/1/0/8/8/10887248/logic_and_conversation.pdf)
writes that successful human communication relies on recognising each
other as rational actors who approach communication with an expectation
that we share compatible internal worlds. To speak is not only to exhale
and inhale the sounds spat into the world, but to manipulate each
others’ internal states, to put ideas into another mind and collaborate
to create a unified situational perception. The academic study of this
phenomenon is called Pragmatics, a domain that takes breath and flesh,
thought and matter and insists that to understand language, they must be
considered as one. I’m sure the irony is not lost on anyone that
‘pragmatic’ in its political senses is most often associated with an
avowed anti-materiality.

Context in Pragmatics
---------------------

At the heart of Pragmatics is context, not as an environment for speech,
but an inextricable part of speaking. What counts as context is twofold:
there is the shared environment in which speakers converse, but also
their cognitive context in which lie the rules they share for
communicating and assumptions about each others’ states of mind.
Pragmatics is what allows for such basic sentences as ‘hand it over’ to
have meaning, without specifying what ‘it’ is. Communication is governed
by a series of maxims for precise, maximally informative conversation
that ensure information exchange is of high quality and easy to
understand. This is not a manifesto for how we should speak, but
patterns that have been scientifically identified in how we already do.

When we talk with one another, we are [constantly negotiating common
ground](http://williamstarr.net/teaching/speech_acts/Stalnaker-2002-Common_Ground.pdf)
- the shared referential, linguistic, cognitive and cultural space in
which speakers interact in conversation. Pragmatic analyses of human
conversation can be expanded to consider political frames at a higher
level of discourse. This is broad area, two strands of which are
particularly useful here. Arroyo notes that political speech broadens
its context, from the transient common ground created privately between
two speakers, [to include multifold
audiences](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781405198431.wbeal1464/abstract)
and the social, economic and other relations of power beyond those
embodied only by the interlocutors themselves. This ground is also
inherently asymmetrical, magnifying power discrepancies that exist
between speakers as they take on their roles as political actors. In
response to this reality, political discourse has developed a workable
consensus for maximising discursive power: verbal aggression to enter
into an opponent’s communicative space, combined with a studied
respectability of language choices so as not to lose face in the eyes of
a potential variety of onlookers.

Does that common Ground include me or is it just a Sound?
---------------------------------------------------------

The linguistic tropes of the online left do not abide by this consensus.
In these interactions, speakers normally comfortable that they know the
rules of the game have been excluded. In Gricean terms, even an argument
is a collaborative act and even insults require both parties to be
evaluating words according to the same values and frames. Blithe,
performative rudeness that draws its power from in-group slang does not
seek to collaborate in this way. ‘Melt’ evicts the linguistic
tastemakers of mainstream discourse from the common ground. No wonder
the level of anxiety it has engendered is so high.

Not only does this political rudeness not act according to comfortable
norms, it has also introduced into a much broader political sphere
something that is not often associated with sincere political passion:
irony. Irony is fragile and tense; inverting speaker intention and
deliberately hitting the bullseye by missing the mark. Irony is human
language at its most nimble and context-dependent extremes. [To engage
with irony is to engage with
risk](http://www.ucl.ac.uk/ls/studypacks/Wilson-Onverbalirony.pdf). If
you do not share the background knowledge, frame of mind and
conversational cues of the ironic speaker, you will not understand the
purpose of their speech. To be denied that comprehension is - however
briefly - to be fundamentally disempowered.

The Search for the True Name of the Corbynite Discourse
-------------------------------------------------------

In this view, Guido’s guide takes on a different, almost ritualistic
purpose. An attempt to find the True Name of the Corbynite discourse. A
prosaic spell cast to bring the chaotic back into the mundane. If only
the code can be cracked, traditional discursive forms might enter into
this arena, and adapt to its flavours and rules. To coat this attempt,
however thinly, in chortling parody is of course part of the ritual
itself. As it seeks to name and control this political rudeness, it
cannot name its own incomprehension, nor its own vulnerable sincerity in
attempting to undo its own ignorance for fear of making it real. To
admit to defeat at the hands of a resurgent political ideology is
unfortunate; to admit defeat to an instrumentalised rudeness that has
galvanised that resurgence is outright humiliation and an admission that
it is more than the language of politics that is changing.

Asymmetries of Power and “Free Speech”
--------------------------------------

Considering speech from a Gricean perspective may also be a way to begin
the break the tedious stalemate of freespeech debates against on whose
terms almost all language politics is now forced to be evaluated. The
asymmetries of power in the context of speech is a much more lucid
framework for assessing rudeness vs abuse, name-calling vs slurs. It is
the uneven power relations of the common ground of political
communication, and the extent to which speakers construct them with
reference to broader structural dynamics, that create real differences
between ‘melt’ and ‘bitch’, between ‘slug’ as spoken to a politician,
and ‘cockroach’ as said of millions of refugees. It is difficult to
successfully argue this point in public, particularly when it is assumed
that the left will always treat language for its own nefarious
authoritarian purpose. It is noteworthy that the Corbynite slang is
remarkably unproblematic in its derivation. Despite the irreverent
laddishness of much of the current electoral left meme culture, these
insults are neither gendered, racist, nor homophobic. What that might
reveal about the power relations expressed in this new language has gone
totally ignored.

These distinctions are not absolute, and the status of words change as
the power behind them shifts; they are varied in the same moment
depending on whose mouths they escape and their relative status as
speakers in a world of strict and violent categories of worth. The
argument is not that as long as you’re fighting the good fight and
speaking truth to power you can always be righteous in saying what you
like. Rather, it is important to have an accurate lens on power
relations upheld and challenged by words as they stand currently, in
order that the linguistic choices we make now and in the future are
radical and useful. It is also vital for the left to clarify its
understanding of the mechanisms of its own discourse, even and
especially when it is informal, so that we can tease of the distinctions
between bad faith policing of rudeness by power running scared, and
linguistic habits that might create realities that are oppressive. In
recognising speech truly as a material act, we can begin to take it
seriously in a way the warped and useless frameworks of freespeech
discourse does not allow. And continue to forge new uses of language
that draw as much on anger, love and radical kindness as the motivations
we value in physical actions.
