A Missing Link: British Attitudes towards Abortion in Ireland and Northern Ireland
==================================================================================

by [Eleanor White](https://twitter.com/pastelchalk)

After the recent general election and with the Tories now planning to go
into coalition with the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), there has been
a lot of rightful outrage about the DUP and finally some long awaited
concern about Northern Irish politics in the UK.

While stereotypically it is often thought that Catholics are the heavy
handed ones when it comes to women’s reproductive rights, it may come as
a surprise to those that don't know much about Ireland/Northern Ireland,
that people from Protestant backgrounds can just be as anti choice as
their Catholic brethren.

The Northern Irish ‘pro life’ group ‘Precious Life’, at the launch of
their campaign ‘NOT IN OUR NAME’ at Stormont in 2003, had Mary Muldoon
from the Social Democratic Labour Party (SDLP) and Iris Robinson from
the DUP. Interestingly, whilst the DUP are an incredibly conservative
party in favour of the 6 counties of Ulster in Northern Ireland
remaining part of the UK, the SDLP consider themselves to be a social
democratic party that's for the reunification of Ireland. While many
individual members of the SDLP are pro choice, the party itself is a
’pro life’ party.

They unveiled Precious Life's campaign billboard in opposition to the
guidelines on abortion that were issued by the Department of Health in
January of that year. Precious Life said they were ‘greatly encouraged’
by the cross-party support for their campaign. Bernadette Smyth, the
main figurehead from Precious Life, said that she was ‘greatly
encouraged by this display of cross-party support. It shows that, after
more than 30 years, opposition to abortion is still one of the few
issues that unite the Unionist and Nationalist parties’.

It's slightly surreal how the main thing that unifies those from
Unionist and Republican backgrounds in Precious Life is their idea that
forced pregnancy is the best thing for those dealing with an unwanted
pregnancy. Even today some of their most active members who do their
regular street stalls near the Marie Stopes Clinic, where you can get
the abortion pill, come from all political and religious backgrounds in
Northern Ireland. From those that are active members of the Democratic
Unionist Party, the Ulster Unionist Party to the SDLP and devout
Catholics who are part of various secretive sects.

Outside the Marie Stopes clinic, many women who may or may not be going
into the the clinic are regularly harassed. And as it's a Marie Stopes
clinic, they do more than just provide abortions; they also do STD
checks, contraceptive consultations, vasectomies and offer a wide
variety of counselling services, so harassing any prospective clientele
that might be getting anything else bar from having an abortion is also
preventing people from accessing other basic healthcare services. This
clinic is also the only clinic on the island of Ireland that provides
abortions legally meaning those from the Republic of Ireland can also
access legal abortions there.

While in Northern Ireland there’s the NHS and people pay their taxes to
fund it, you can't access abortion from it meaning women are forced to
travel to England, Scotland and Wales to access abortion care and have
to pay for it out of their own pocket, even though they live in the UK.
The vast majority of clinics in the rest of the UK that provide abortion
services also have an Irish price range, which takes in things such as
travel and accommodation. These Irish price ranges are for both those
from the Republic and Northern Ireland.

In 1979 the taoiseach of the time Charles Haughey introduced the Health
(Family Planning) Act – which would stringently regulate contraception.
Speaking in the Dáil he said it was ‘an Irish solution to an Irish
problem’. Little did he know that ‘the Irish solution to an Irish
problem’ would also be a whole island problem when it came to abortion.

In recent years a lot has been revealed about the Catholic Mother and
Baby homes that existed on either side of the island of Ireland. While
they are generally seen as a Catholic solution used to oppress and
imprison women, there were also Protestant Mother and Baby Homes.

This idea of imprisoning people and oppressing them for personal issues
they had no control over concerning societal prejudices first came from
the Victorian workhouses that were built by British rule, to imprison
the poor, introduced by the Irish Poor Laws of 1838 which were a series
of Acts of Parliament intended to address social instability due to
widespread and persistent poverty on the island. The Irish Poor Laws
were very closely modelled on the English Poor Law of 1834.

Which is to say, these Magdalene Laundries and Children homes weren't
just an Irish Catholic invention, used to imprison women who didn't fall
into the Madonna complex - they were modelled on the Victorian
workhouses and introduced by British imperialism.

It’s estimated that 200 children were born between 1922 and 1949, at the
Bethany Home in Dublin alone, an evangelical institution for unmarried
women and their children that fulfilled the same social role as its
Catholic brethren i.e to stem the contamination to the body politic that
were these women and children - by keeping the women and their unwanted
offspring far away from prying public eyes. While these Protestant
Mother and Baby homes haven't been investigated as much as the Catholic
Mother and Baby Homes, there were most definitely children that were
buried in unmarked graves in them, similarly to the Tuam Mother and Baby
home.

The institutional sexism that women face in both the Republic of Ireland
and Northern Ireland are incredibly similar in a lot of ways. Abortion
in Northern Ireland is illegal under the Offences against the Person Act
of 1861, where you can technically face life imprisonment for having an
illegal abortion, or being in possession of medical abortifacients.
While in the Republic of Ireland abortion is illegal under the 8th
amendment in the Irish constitution, the same legislation - the Offences
against the Person Act of 1861 - was in place in the Republic of Ireland
until it was repealed by the Protection of Life During Pregnancies act
of 2013.

This piece of legislation was brought in after much national and
international outcry over the death of Savita Halappanavar in Co. Galway
October 2012, who requested an abortion while she was miscarrying. But
while the Protection of Life During Pregnancy Act of 2013 allows for
terminations in case of suicide and incest, you have to be reviewed by a
panel of doctors and prove to them that you need an abortion.

Interestingly I feel that it’s the Offences Against the Person Act of
1861, which also criminalized male homosexuality in England and Wales
until 1967, Scotland 1980, Northern Ireland 1982 and in the Republic of
Ireland in 1993, shows how truly ‘unique’ our ‘special relationship’ is
with each other due to colonisation and imperialism.

The Proclamation of the Irish Republic 1916 states that there is a
guarantee of ‘religious and civil liberty, equal rights and equal
opportunities to all its citizens’ - this was the first mention of
gender equality, given that at the time Irish women under British law
were not allowed to vote. It was a truly a revolutionary document as it
also stated a promise of ‘cherishing all the children of the nation
equally’, meaning that working class inner city Catholics in
Dublin/Derry would get treated the same as upper middle class Anglo
Irish Protestants in rural Laois/Fermanagh and vice versa.

But here we are in 2017 where the only equal thing with both sides of
Protestant and Catholic fundamentalism on the island of Ireland, is
forcing women to continue with unwanted pregnancies.

I’ve found it surreal since moving to the UK how little Brits actually
know about absolutely anything to do with Ireland and Northern Ireland -
let alone Northern Irish politics - given that we were colonised by you
for +900 years and continue to live with the effects of British
colonisation every single day.

And it’s interesting how the DUP is now a nationwide talking point, post
election, when before no one seemed to care about how DUP members have
been terrorising people from Catholic backgrounds and POC in Northern
Ireland for decades. Let alone all their very genuine and well
documented terrorist connections. All this rage is rightful but where is
it concerning Operation Demetrius, the Irish hunger strike of 1981, the
Shankill Butchers, the Dublin and Monaghan Bombings of 1974?

But now that we have your attention, please stand in solidarity with the
thousands of women forced to travel from Ireland every single year to
access safe and legal abortions.

Please donate to the [Abortion Support
Network](https://www.asn.org.uk/donate/) that gives grants to women and
others who can’t afford the cost of traveling to the UK for an abortion
and paying for it.

Please donate to, and support the efforts of, the [Abortion Rights
Campaign](https://www.abortionrightscampaign.ie/get-involved/donate/) -
the largest grassroots pro-choice organisation in Ireland.

Please support [Alliance for Choice](http://www.alliance4choice.com),
which is an activist organisation which campaigns for free, safe, legal
abortion in Northern Ireland.

Please support the [London Irish Abortion Rights
Campaign](https://londonirisharc.com) which is a London based
organisations whose main aim is to again advocate for free, safe, legal
abortion in the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland and to bring
attention to the thousands of women travelling to the UK to access basic
healthcare.
