This is Just the Beginning: Corbynism's Next Steps
==================================================

Despite the polling uncertainty of the last couple of weeks, the overall
picture of this general election is now clear. While the Tories may
remain the largest party in the House of Commons, the Labour Party has
forced a hung parliament and gained seats with over 40% of the vote and
its biggest tally since 1997 – a remarkable achievement after two years
of continual undermining of Corbyn’s leadership. Theresa May’s vision of
the future – in addition to being an incompetently-presented one – is
unremittingly bleak, insular, petty and incorrigibly reactionary to its
bone marrow. It is no surprise that it failed to ignite the enthusiasm
of the electorate. Labour’s vision of far-reaching national renewal,
hope and solidarity, on the other hand, could not have been more
different.

On April 18th, when Theresa May called the election, [the Conservatives
were on 46% in the polls while Labour were on
25%](http://ukpollingreport.co.uk/voting-intention-2). However, now it
is theoretically possible – if unlikely – that Jeremy Corbyn could be
the new Prime Minister. At the very least Labour has increased its share
of the vote and its number of MPs for the first time since 1997. It has
seen the [fastest increase in polling
numbers](http://www.dannydorling.org/?p=6046), borne out by the result,
ever recorded.

These remarkable achievements are, above all, a testament to the
courage, principles and also the practical political skills of Jeremy
Corbyn and the Labour leadership. This courage, principled approach and
political intelligence produced a manifesto and election campaign that
for many was inspirational and begins to address the crucial concerns of
Britain’s working and marginalised people with more seriousness and more
radicalism than has been seen for decades. The result is also a
testament to the efforts of activists, many of whom were keen Corbyn
supporters in both leadership contests, others who Corbyn and our
programme inspired to get involved – and others who may have been
sceptical about Corbyn.

Furthermore, the Labour leadership’s position on Brexit has also been
proven correct. The likes of Alistair Campbell have been quick to
attempt to spin this result as the Revenge of the Remainers. In reality,
it is nothing of the sort. Corbyn’s decision to impose a three-line whip
on his MPs to vote to trigger Article 50 was scorned by liberals, but it
has been vindicated. Any attempt to block A50 would have played into the
Tories’ hands, allowing them to portray Labour as aloof elitists,
contemptuous of the democratic process. It is now clear that Corbyn was
right to spurn this siren song. Our transformative programme, by
contrast, was able to reach across the Brexit/Remain divide by
addressing real material issues.

This result settles the question of the Labour leadership. It also
settles the question of the broad outline of the programme on which we
will campaign in the next election, which could be a matter of months
away. Nevertheless, important questions remain over the detail and
radicalism of a potential programme and over the kind of party Labour
will be going forward. The answer to these questions will affect the
coherence of the next campaign and therefore the party’s chance of
winning, the extent of a future manifesto’s ambition to transform the
country and how far we can implement that programme in office.

While Labour may not, ultimately, be in a position to govern now, its
performance in this election, its grassroots-powered campaign and its
manifesto offer real reasons for optimism, and a platform for further
growth. Were it implemented, there is no question that this year’s
Labour manifesto would make many millions of people better off. The
party has not stood on such a bold and unashamedly social-democratic
programme for many years. As [Max Shanly and Ronan
Burtenshaw](https://jacobinmag.com/2017/05/labour-manifesto-jeremy-corbyn-theresa-may-election)
note, the manifesto quite simply holds out the promise of ‘a society
worth living in’. This would not be so without Jeremy Corbyn’s
leadership. Nor would Labour be producing such rigorous, serious and
radical work, offering the potential to even go beyond this manifesto,
such as the ‘[Alternative Models of
Ownership](/labours-alternative-models-of-ownership-report/)’ report
commissioned by John McDonnell and Rebecca Long-Bailey.

The election campaign itself has generated the kind of buzz and
enthusiasm, particularly from young people, not generated by the Labour
Party at election time for decades. The party’s spirited campaign –
which, delightfully, saw it unseat Nick Clegg – and the raft of popular,
progressive policies it put forward were central to narrowing the Tory
poll lead significantly and rapidly. Though some will try, that
narrowing cannot be put down purely to Tory ineptitude. Sustaining this
engagement, and building on the energy already created, will be crucial
for the Corbyn project if it is to reach its full democratic and
socialist potential.

Even Corbyn’s most intransigent critics inside the Labour Party will
struggle to paint this performance in a bad light. Yvette Cooper and
Chuka Umunna in particular were clearly ‘on manoeuvres’ during the
election campaign, although both have been forced to acknowledge
Corbyn’s right to stay on as leader. However, after a result such as
this, it is unthinkable that any attempt to launch a leadership
challenge would earn anything other than rightful derision from both
Labour members and trade unions.

We should remind ourselves here that European social democracy remains
mired in secular crisis. By depriving the Tories of a majority, gaining
seats and increasing its share of the popular vote, Corbyn’s Labour has
successfully bucked a very powerful and sustained continent-wide trend.
Those who attempt to do this down risk making themselves a laughing
stock. The stated raison d’être of the Labour right – that only they can
expand the electoral appeal of the Labour Party – now lies in ruins,
exposed as a complete sham.

Neither can the electoral woes of Labour’s equivalent centre-left
parties elsewhere in Europe be pinned on any Corbyn-esque experiments.
European social democracy has long since acclimatised itself to
neoliberal technocracy and shows no serious signs of political and
intellectual renewal. Make no mistake, this tepid managerialism is what
would be on offer in Britain now were it not for Corbyn. [Deborah
Mattinson’s
report](http://www.itv.com/news/2016-01-25/revealed-secret-labour-report-calls-on-party-to-atone-for-its-past/)
into Labour’s 2015 election defeat, commissioned by Harriet Harman,
offers us a partial glimpse into what might have been – and thankfully
wasn’t.

A return to the managerialism and technocracy that, lest we forget,
already cost it the two general elections preceding this one would
unquestionably be a backward step for the Labour Party. The alarmingly
and increasingly reactionary Blue Labour trend, which seems to have
gained real traction among those sections of the Labour Party devoid of
any other ideas, must also be resolutely opposed. As demonstrated by
this election, Corbyn’s brand of politics holds out – both in electoral
and extra-parliamentary terms – infinitely greater hope for the party’s
future, as well as for those across Britain who’ve seen their wages
stagnate, their communities ravaged by cuts, and the social safety net
they depend on hacked away.

Rank-and-file Labour members should be strongly encouraged by this
result as well as by the energy of the campaign and the promise of the
manifesto. In historical terms, the 2017 Labour manifesto is a modest
social-democratic document, but in the current context it represents a
significant attempt to substitute solidarity, public action and common
endeavour for hegemonic neoliberal values. This represents a clear shift
in the right direction and provides a solid platform on which to build.

It is now essential that the membership inspired by Corbyn proceed in
reshaping the Labour Party in his and in our image. Winning two
leadership elections by landslide margins had already earned him the
right, and the strength of Labour’s election campaign and the subsequent
result has cemented it. It has also earnt him the right to appoint a
shadow cabinet solidly in line with the established direction of the
party. The immediate priority is to ensure that the so-called
‘[McDonnell
amendment](http://www.leftfutures.org/2017/04/for-the-mcdonnell-amendment/)’
– reducing the nominations threshold for would-be leadership challengers
from 15% to 5% of the Parliamentary Labour Party – passes at this year’s
conference. Constituency parties have until July 7th to select
conference delegates and the Labour left will need to move quickly. The
amendment’s chances of passing hang in the balance.

Corbyn’s emboldened supporters must look not just to reform the party
machine and parliamentary party so that it more accurately reflects his
politics and those of the bulk of the membership. They must also
re-examine the fundamentals of the way the Labour Party organises and
campaigns. Its position in many of its historic heartlands remains
uncertain. This is no fault of Corbyn’s – the labour movement as a whole
has endured almost four decades of sustained decline and retrenchment.

The task of arresting that decline, and once again making our movement a
visible, active, and valued presence in working-class communities, has
fallen to Corbyn and the Labour left. It is an urgent one. Indeed, it is
possible that by using our formidable numerical and organisational power
to help meet needs directly, for example in setting up breakfast clubs,
food banks and offering welfare advice to help communities cut free of
support by the May government we could both help people ameliorate the
damage done by austerity and further rebuild the Labour Party’s presence
in these communities.

In addition, the policymaking structures of the Labour Party must be
opened up to the membership. The campaigning efforts of Labour’s
new-found mass membership – numbering over half a million – in this
election were hugely impressive, but that membership isn’t there just to
knock on doors, work the phones and serve as unpaid postal workers. It
has ideas, concerns and capacities that need and deserve to be
harnessed. The process of shaping Labour Party policy needs to be taken
out of the backrooms and handed over to newly-empowered members.

Members also have a right to see their politics reflected in the makeup
of the Parliamentary Labour Party. Despite the impressive achievement
this election represents for Labour, the socialist left in Parliament
may be proportionally smaller than it was in when Corbyn was first
elected leader in 2015. Despite the strength of his grassroots support,
Corbyn’s position in Parliament remains an isolated one as a
consequence.

The opportunity to engage members in selecting candidates (at least for
vacant Labour-held seats) was deliberately squandered by the National
Executive Committee. Corbyn must ensure that in future, candidate
selection is a truly member-led process. Mandatory reselection must be
put back on the agenda. Had it not been for the two years of sniping and
sabotage from large sections of the PLP, we could have been celebrating
a Labour majority this morning. This disruption cannot be allowed to
happen again especially when a disciplined Labour presence in Parliament
will hasten the collapse of a Conservative-led government should they be
able to cobble something together. Furthermore, Labour Party membership
has more than doubled since 2015. Its representation on the NEC should
do likewise, and so the number of CLP representatives on the committee
should be increased from six to 12 to further enhance our democratic
control.

Corbyn should also look to capitalise on the momentum created by this
election campaign by launching a renewed recruitment drive. Such a
project was [mooted during last summer’s leadership
contest](https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/27/jeremy-corbyns-team-targets-labour-membership-one-million).
However, it appears nothing much has yet come of it. The leadership
should now seize the initiative, drawing thousands more people into the
party and providing them with the tools and encouragement they need to
transform their own local parties. Those inspired by the vision laid out
by Labour in its election campaign and manifesto must be welcomed into
the party’s ranks.

The case must now be put: if you believe in these policies and voted for
them, you should join the Labour Party to help ensure that they remain
on the agenda both within the party and in the country at large.
Momentum has talked about grassroots organising and campaigning to once
again embed the Labour Party at the heart of working-class communities.
The vision outlined within the manifesto must be defended and developed.

We firmly believe that Labour’s performance in this general election
firmly vindicates Corbyn’s leadership and strategy. That said, careful
planning must be devoted to a future leadership transition. If the
McDonnell amendment passes at conference, a left candidate will be all
but guaranteed a place on any future ballot. But handing over unreformed
party structures, a largely unsupportive bureaucracy and rancorous PLP
would risk setting the next left leadership up to fail. Democratising
Labour is a prerequisite for democratising Britain, [as Aaron Bastani
has
argued](http://novaramedia.com/2017/04/21/democratise-labour-to-democratise-britain/).

The relentless attempts at character assassination to which Corbyn has
been subjected – aided and abetted, it has to be said, by a good number
of his own MPs – have been extraordinary. In spite of this, Labour has
come through to earn an extraordinary result under his leadership. But
we do not consider it productive simply to complain about media bias –
considering the political makeup of the British media, we take it as a
given that no socialist can seriously expect a fair hearing from the
press or the broadcasters which are themselves deeply embedded in the
political establishment. The labour movement must therefore get serious
about [developing its own media](/get-involved/), putting forward its
own analyses and perspectives without the distorting effect of being
filtered through Tory or liberal papers.

It is worth emphasising that the Labour leadership managed to oversee a
dynamic and inspiring campaign after two years of now hidden, now open
civil warfare in the Labour Party. The difficulty of this should not be
understated. In fact, we can only wonder where the party would be had it
not been for almost two years of implacable hostility from so many of
its own parliamentarians – or, indeed, if Scottish Labour hadn’t fallen
into such a state of dereliction by 2015. A highly promising new
generation of socialist Labour activists is emerging in Scotland –
including Danielle Rowley and Paul Sweeney, newly-elected MPs for
Midlothian and Glasgow North East respectively – but for now Scottish
Labour remains a redoubt of right-wing Labour’s ‘old politics’. It is
Corbyn’s politics and that of this new generation of socialist
activists, and not those of Kezia Dugdale, which could bring it fully
back to life.

The brand of politics for which Corbyn has come to serve as a – perhaps
unlikely – standard-bearer has the potential not just to bring about
that long-awaited and much-needed redistribution of wealth and power
towards Britain’s working class. It also has the potential to power a
wholesale revival of British civil and political life. Labour’s election
campaign was remarkable for its boldness. Corbyn must now show a similar
spirit when it comes to the remaking of the party itself.

Moreover, the energy of the campaign, Corbyn’s own personality and,
above all, the manifesto’s connection to popular discontents – offering
serious policies to improve the conditions of the working class – have
dealt a serious, probably fatal blow, not only to May herself but also
to so-called [Erdington
Conservatism](http://www.conservativehome.com/thecolumnists/2016/03/nick-timothy-what-does-the-conservative-party-offer-a-working-class-kid-from-brixton-birmingham-bolton-or-bradford.html).
It is worth recalling how formidable this Conservative project of both
unifying the right-wing vote and of detaching a large-section of the
working-class from the habit of voting Labour had appeared. Labour under
Corbyn, through a relentless focus on the material conditions of
working-class life, have prevented what would have been a fundamental
shift in British politics.

As Tony Benn very famously said, there is no final victory and no final
defeat – only the same battles to be fought over and over again. There
are indeed many battles to be fought in the months and years ahead, both
to defend the Corbyn leadership and to advance its vision further. For
those non-Labour members who were enthused by the manifesto and
campaign, we appeal to you to join the party now. Your energies, your
ideas and your talents are needed.
