Terror, Tragedy and the Political
=================================

by [Jonathan Murden](https://twitter.com/RedMotovilov)

It is difficult to write about tragedy. Events such as terrorist attacks
not only shatter the sense of security that many of us in the imperial
core are accustomed to; they also shatter the language with which one
might attempt to speak of it. The vast proliferation of stock phrases
such as ‘Pray for X’ or ‘Je Suis X’ is not only the result of the
brevity demanded of social media, but also provides an acceptable
response when no response seems adequate. The language of condolences
can sometimes seem cliché or insincere, but to say more that this can be
difficult.

This difficulty has been highlighted all too sharply by the terrorist
attacks in Manchester and London in the past month. In particular, the
question of what is permissible for a politician to say in the wake of
such events, especially in the middle of a general election, has become
a central issue.
[Some](http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2017/05/26/jeremy-corbyn-condemned-crass-appalling-timing-speech-linking/)
[commentators](https://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2017/05/jeremy-corbyn-politicising-islamist-murder/)
have seen [Jeremy Corbyn’s
remarks](http://press.labour.org.uk/post/161089328659/jeremy-corbyn-speech),
criticising British foreign policy and our relations with [repressive
regimes](http://press.labour.org.uk/post/161461521264/jeremy-corbyn-speech-in-carlisle-after-the-london)
in the Middle East, as politicising the death of innocents for his own
ends. Even if these conversations are important and necessary, they
should not be inserted into a time of tragedy and crisis, particularly
since, at least after Manchester, all parties had temporarily suspended
campaigning.

However, the choice to politicise these events or not to politicise them
is not within our control. Whilst tragedy may shatter language, the
institutions of the state will usually remain stable. Though some [even
on the
left](https://twitter.com/paulmasonnews/status/867144038486552576?lang=en)
have presented the response of these institutions to the attacks in
Manchester and London as ‘apolitical’, we would be naïve to accept this
assessment of the escalation of police power at the command of the
executive branch. Whatever her intentions, the show of strength in the
increased presence of armed police on our streets reinforces May’s
self-presentation as a stable leader in times of crisis (an image that
was otherwise [rapidly
disintegrating](http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/politics/how-theresa-mays-election-campaign-10537186)).
A similar impression is created by the pronouncement of a ten-step
counter-terrorism programme from the steps of Downing Street. We cannot
pretend the ability to address the nation as Prime Minister in the midst
of an election for that role would not have an impact on the results.

In his 1957 essay entitled ‘Photography and Electoral Appeal’, Roland
Barthes wrote about how photography was increasingly being utilised in
electoral campaigns as an appeal to voters in itself, in which the
visual impression of the candidate – 'a physical climate, a set of daily
choices expressed in a morphology, a way of dressing, a posture' –
replaces a way of understanding and responding to political
events.[^post-10-1] These features are retained, even intensified in the
television appearance outside 10 Downing Street. This strategy places
the candidate outside the realm of the political; rhetoric and policy
depend upon a form of rationality for their appeal because they exist in
language, and can thus be debated and responded to, but an image relies
entirely on authority. (There is no qualitative difference in this
strategy as deployed by liberals who would entrust politics to a
technocratic elite and openly authoritarian reactionaries.) In the
shattering of language after tragedy, it is even easier to displace
attempted analysis of the situation, such as Corbyn’s, with this kind of
political theatre. Alongside the constant refrain of ‘Strong and Stable
Leadership’ to the staged campaign events, May’s response to Manchester
and London is just one example of the
[authoritarianism](http://edition.cnn.com/2017/04/19/opinions/theresa-may-authoritarian-maltby-opinion/index.html)
that has been so determinative for the Conservative campaign.

We also have to understand May’s response in the context of the wider
expansion of police powers since the millennium. As part of the War on
Terror, national security has been guaranteed by the increased
surveillance of Black and Minority Ethnic communities through
stop-and-search powers and legislation such as Prevent, which
[CAGE](https://cage.ngo/wp-content/uploads/A4_PREVENT_CAGE_REPORT_WEB.pdf)
have referred to as “a cradle to a grave police state”, that explicitly
targets such communities as threats to society. The security such
measures offer is deeply racialised, and it would be dishonest to
pretend that there is no link between these actions of the state and the
steady growth of [hate
crimes](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-manchester-40064424) by
civilians against such communities.

As such, that it was Corbyn who is presented as having illegitimately
‘politicised’ these events rather than May is deeply revealing as to how
politics and the political sphere is conceived. In British society, war
is presented as a merely ‘pragmatic’ matter rather than a political
decision, and ironically, this depoliticisation of war has created a
politics that revolves almost entirely around it. This has long roots,
going back at least as far as government propaganda during the Second
World War (a recent example of this can be found in the opening
paragraphs of this
[piece](http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-400277/Britain-World-War-II.html)
in the Mail Online), and behind that, to the legacy of colonialism [much
admired by many in the Conservative
Party](https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/ministers-aim-to-build-empire-2-0-with-african-commonwealth-after-brexit-v9bs6f6z9).
The colonial link highlights that to see Britain’s wars in the 21st
century as apolitical requires one to see Middle Eastern casualties, if
they are even acknowledged, as merely necessary losses for the sake of
British security. We also cannot pretend that there is no connection
between these ‘interventionary’ wars – including the ‘clash of
civilisations’ narrative that fuels it – and the increase in [hate
crimes](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-manchester-40064424)
against Muslims in Britain itself. The false exclusion of war from the
political realm is costing lives both here and abroad, and this violence
is highly racialised.

This depoliticisation is also part of why many have denied the obvious
relationship between recent terrorist attacks and British foreign
policy. The suffering we have caused has helped to confirm the narrative
of ‘East vs West’ that groups like ISIS appeal to, and the chaos we have
created in Syria and Libya is the perfect space for these organisations
to thrive in. This is before one even takes into account that many of
the figures that form these groups are using [British
weapons](https://www.amnesty.org.uk/how-isis-islamic-state-isil-got-its-weapons-iraq-syria)
and were trained in [the
West](https://www.washingtonpost.com/posteverything/wp/2014/08/18/the-terrorists-fighting-us-now-we-just-finished-training-them/?utm_term=.3b9594bdf264).
None of this is new. Figures from across the political spectrum have
[commented on it](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-iRVHvLGDk4), and
Corbyn’s speeches refer to acknowledgements by security services to this
effect. However, previously, this analysis was only in the abstract, and
its political impact was minimal. To apply it directly to policy, as
Corbyn proposes, is therefore presented as an illegitimate
politicisation, simply for treating war as a political matter at all.

Bringing Britain’s imperialist adventurism in the Middle East and North
Africa to a close would not only be an unequivocally good decision for
security and foreign policy, but in the context of wider Labour policy –
such as its emphasis on diplomacy and commitment to end arms exports to
nations where they may be used in violation of international law – it
would be a landmark event in contemporary British politics. And yet,
this is not to praise Corbyn without qualification. The “War on Terror”
and the accompanying growth in police power began under a Labour
government, even if this has been built upon by Conservative (and
Coalition) imperialist interventions and further extensions of police
powers. The Labour manifesto promises 10,000 more police officers and
1,000 more border guards, and in a speech following the attacks in
London, Corbyn promised “full authority to the police to use whatever
force is necessary to protect and save life”. One person dies in police
custody or following police contact in England and Wales every six days,
according to
[Inquest](http://www.inquest.org.uk/statistics/deaths-in-police-custody),
and a disproportionate number of these people are from [Black and
Minority Ethnic
communities](http://www.inquest.org.uk/statistics/bame-deaths-in-police-custody).
In this context, handing security services whatever powers they request
no longer appears like an obvious pragmatic step, but rather a
capitulation to the depoliticisation of militarisation such as Corbyn
rightly condemned in our foreign policy.

It would be easy in a time when the stakes seem so high, and when so
much of the left seems to be mobilising behind Corbyn, to offer
uncritical support for the Labour platform. However, elections decide
who will manage the nation-state, and as such, usually leave the
foundations and organs of this state unchallenged. Such events are of
temporary urgency, but they cannot be allowed to fully determine how we
perceive the political realm. The Labour Left is not immune from a
naivety around the state and its repressive apparatus, treating it as
apolitical or at least as politically neutral, and in this regard, it
can sometimes prove difficult to distinguish the Labour Left’s, albeit
sometimes fraught, acceptance of the categories of parliamentarianism
and with it this naivety towards the state from an opportunistic
electoralism.[^post-10-2] A sense of new possibility, after decades of
neoliberalism, is part of what makes Corbyn so popular. We must not be
afraid to bring this sense of new possibility, this reimagination of the
political, not only to foreign policy, but to security, migration, and
anti-racism.

[^post-10-1]: Roland Barthes, 'Photography and Electoral Appeal' in
    *Mythologies*, London, Vintage, 2009, p. 91.

[^post-10-2]: Ralph Miliband, *Parliamentary Socialism: A Study in the
    Politics of Labour*, London, Merlin.
