Hope, Slammed Doors and "Ronnie Corbett": Tales from the Campaign Trail
=======================================================================

by [Tom Blackburn](https://twitter.com/malaiseforever?lang=en), [Hayley
Masi](https://twitter.com/isamyelyah?lang=en), [James
Lomas](https://twitter.com/JamesLomas88?lang=en), [Lor
Bird](https://twitter.com/LorBirdy?lang=en), [Tom
Atkins](https://twitter.com/twatkins5000)

The recent general election campaign saw a genuinely extraordinary
grassroots ground campaign mobilising on behalf of the Labour Party. Raw
new recruits and experienced veteran members alike took to doorsteps all
across the country as part of the effort to get a Labour government led
by Jeremy Corbyn into office. The campaigning effort saw Labour sweep to
shock victories in places like Kensington, Canterbury and Battersea,
while other previously rock-solid Tory seats including Chingford and
Wood Green, Putney, and Chipping Barnet are firmly on Labour’s target
list for next time. Even Southport, without a single Labour MP since the
constituency’s foundation in 1885, is now in the party’s sights.

We caught up with four activists all of whom went out on the campaign
trail for the Labour Party this spring, to find out more about what
their experiences were, what responses they received on the doorstep and
what inspired them to canvass for Labour this time around.

Hayley Masi, Swindon South CLP
------------------------------

I recently went out canvassing for Labour for the first time – Jeremy
Corbyn, his team, and their vision of hope gave me something I wanted
badly enough to sign myself up. Door knocking is often held up as the
backbone of election campaigning, the difficult but righteous work that
We The People must go out and do to convert the non-believers.

In reality, and to my relief, a large part of door knocking turned out
to be data collection - and an even larger part, reminding people that
the election is actually happening, and that your candidate exists. I
went armed with policy arguments, steeling myself to hit potentially
hostile voters with some facts and stats. Generally, though, you won’t
need to engage people in debate about policy detail. Much of what’s
required is simply knocking on the doors of people who your local Labour
Party will already have down as sympathetic - or potentially amenable -
to the cause, checking that they will be turning up on the big day, and
asking if the party can rely on their support.

Data collection sounds less righteous than launching impassioned
arguments at people, changing hearts and minds, but this is important
work, and it really does help get out the vote on election day. I had
reservations about going at all, of course, chief among them a concern
that the people canvassing alongside me might all be anti-Corbyn slugs.
As it turned out, Momentum's visible presence in the group put me at
ease, and I would certainly recommend linking up with them - or just
taking a like-minded friend along for solidarity, if you are worried
about being in a group that may not share your enthusiasm for the Corbyn
project.

So, my verdict after my first experience canvassing is thus - it's
definitely not fun (in any reasonable person’s sense of the word) and
you will get the odd door slammed in your face, but it also isn't
terrifying, and the satisfaction of chipping in to support the cause is
definitely worth it.

James Lomas, York Central CLP
-----------------------------

What inspired me to do it? Felt like I had to really. I'd joined the
Labour Party to vote for Corbyn to be leader, twice, and his success
depended on a grassroots movement. I'm not very good at social media,
but also didn't really believe it could ever be effective, and I didn't
fancy the idea of long CLP meetings, so I decided to help out with
campaigning. The first time I did it was with the MP giving out a
petition about housing, prior to the snap election being triggered. Once
the election was called I tried to go once or twice per week, which was
a really amazing experience.

The whole process was a little bit archaic. 'The board' seemed to have
an aura among some of the senior canvassers at first. The board told us
on which houses to knock, the questions to ask and was where we recorded
data. I told a friend about some of my early experiences who remarked it
sounded more like a survey than an election campaign. Over time, and
guided by excellent experienced canvassers, I learned that it wasn't
necessary to rigidly stick to the questions on the board, and to be fair
the strictures imposed by the board had helped me to gain confidence in
the beginning knowing that the expectation was merely asking simple
to-the-point questions where it was hard to go wrong. But I also learned
that the board's data was hopelessly outdated. The ward in which I was
campaigning had quite a few students, and a lot of rented accommodation,
so the data on the board from sometimes as far back as 2010 was often
totally useless. This was a source of frustration knowing the importance
of younger voters to Labour's success. The board was of course very
useful on election day to remind only Labour supporters to go out and
vote.

Generally speaking I found the responses to be refreshingly open-minded.
This was refreshing as during my day job I’m surrounded by academics who
are often very sure of their own view, and express it in - at times -
quite a condescending way. I found that people on the doorstep did
sometimes object to Corbyn's leadership, but more often than not for a
decent and straightforward reason. They felt that a new leader would
stop the party infighting and leave a coherent party message. But not
all responses were quite so reasonable - for example, one man repeatedly
told me that the reason he wasn't voting Labour was because of ‘Ronnie
Corbett’.

Lor Bird, Derbyshire Dales CLP
------------------------------

I went out canvassing in a few seats during the election campaign. There
was North East Derbyshire - a seat which was Labour but went Tory this
time, much of which is made up of former mining communities. I also went
canvassing in Derbyshire Dales, a safe Tory seat which stayed that way
this time. I work in Amber Valley, another safe Tory seat which also
incorporates the birthplace of the EDL. The Sun and Mail influence is
still strong in these areas, which are very lacking in graduates and
undergraduates. I want it to change.

I was inspired to campaign once the election was called (both council
and national) because I wanted to see both Corbyn and Labour win and
also see the Tories kicked out. I helped out in North East Derbyshire
and got the information through a Momentum email, though I haven’t gone
to any Momentum meetings. The person organising the canvassing was very
negative towards me when I mentioned Momentum and he also said Corbyn
was very ‘Marmite’ on the doorstep. He disagreed when I said the media
were biased against Corbyn. A new canvasser shadowed the person leading
the session and I asked him afterwards whether Corbyn had come up on the
doorstep - he said and added that the lead canvasser didn’t make any
effort to defend Corbyn. I’m sure negative attitudes like this didn’t
help us in our efforts to retain the seat.

On the doorstep, most people didn’t answer the door. One Labour
supporter told me they hadn’t had any Labour leaflet - in the campaign
room they said that tories had pulled them out of letter boxes. This was
echoed on Twitter. I didn’t encounter much negativity about Corbyn. Any
negativity I did encounter was more about Labour’s perceived lack of
credibility – on the economy in particular. Brexit only came up once,
but there was a widespread lack of trust in politics generally. Elderly
Labour supporters who were very loyal miss the whole labour and trade
union community that was once very strong there.

In North East Derbyshire, there were issues about Natascha Engel - the
local MP - who was seen by some people as being more concerned with her
career down in Westminster than with the local community. Having said
that, she did have considerable genuine support locally and wasn’t
disparaging about Corbyn.

One success I had was in getting a local resident to come out and join
us in campaigning, after knocking on his door and keeping in touch. I’m
now working with my own local CLP of Derbyshire Dales to make some
changes, particularly in how we relate to elderly people. We need to arm
them with tablets - the electronic kind!

Tom Atkins, Brighton Pavilion CLP
---------------------------------

I took part in a few canvassing sessions in Hove to try and help defend
Peter Kyle's slim majority of 1,200. It was the first time I had been
actively involved in anything like this, but after 2015, Brexit and then
Trump I was feeling pretty despondent and felt that I needed to do
something.

I was pretty nervous at the outset but it turned out to be easier than I
thought. We were given a simple script to get started with, and we were
advised that while people were unlikely to remember much, if any, of the
conversation you had by the time the election came round, they'd
remember whether or not you were nice, so the key thing was to be
friendly and upbeat. Having a go at persuading someone was a bonus, but
it was mainly about information gathering.

I learned two key things. Firstly, that when it comes to politics,
people are much nicer on the doorstep than they are online. Even the
ones who don't agree with you will be civil, and for the most part
respect you for coming out. It was like a breath of fresh air in
comparison to the kind of poisonous social media sniping that you can
get sucked into online if you're not careful. Aside from anything else,
this made me feel that the political situation that we were in was less
bleak than I'd been led to believe.

The second was to listen. There were quite a few people who really
wanted to get something off their chest. The mere act of standing there
and hearing what they had to say seemed to help; they would remember
that it was Labour who had made the effort to come to their door and
hear them out.

In the end Peter won comfortably; there were a number of factors here -
among them Southern Rail, Brexit, the appalling Tory candidate, and
Jeremy running a brilliant campaign nationally - but I like to think
that having a highly visible, positive and energetic team on the ground
getting to all parts of the constituency was vital in growing the vote
and getting it out. My views on it might have been coloured by the fact
I was in reasonably off middle class Labour areas where everyone is
dreadfully nice, but I found the process very uplifting, even before the
results came in.
