Corbynism from Below?
=====================

by [Tom Blackburn](https://twitter.com/malaiseforever)

Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour Party has earned just rewards for a laudably
radical election campaign and manifesto, along with a huge grassroots
door-to-door effort - almost 13 million votes and a net gain of 30 MPs,
bringing Labour’s Commons cohort up to a total of 262. As our [election
editorial](https://newsocialist.org.uk/this-is-just-the-beginning-corbynisms-next-steps/)
argues, this strong performance - particularly remarkable coming as it
does after almost two years of factional warfare within the party - now
leaves Corbyn in an unassailable position as leader.

It would, however, be naive to think that those MPs who have been in
opposition to Corbyn will simply fall into line as a result. And
furthermore, we should not allow a good showing in one general election
to blind us to the need to rebuild Labour’s social base - which in many
places remains in a parlous state. Corbyn now has the opportunity to
proceed with the radical transformation of the Labour Party, but this is
not just a question of taking control of the existing machinery for the
left - the Labour leadership must urgently turn its attention to how it
harnesses the capacities of the party membership, buoyed up by their
recent successes.

Renewing Solidarities
---------------------

In an [article for *The
Guardian*](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/mar/07/labour-reinvention-comes-from-bottom-up),
Momentum activist Deborah Hermanns outlines a possible way forward.
Noting the party's struggles in its post-industrial former heartlands –
a multifaceted crisis frequently pinned on Corbyn despite being [many
years in the
making](http://www.labourpains.group.shef.ac.uk/labours-crisis-and-the-end-of-the-two-party-system/)
– she calls for a process of 'bottom-up cultural renewal' driven by the
Labour Party’s grassroots.

Citing Greece's Solidarity4All network as a possible model for Labour,
she suggests that this process might involve the establishment of
'social spaces, cinema clubs, food banks and sports centres' – to which
might be added unionisation drives, breakfast clubs and political
education projects. Another forerunner is the Black Panther Party, which
ran a range of social programmes - from breakfast clubs to health
clinics - in cities across the United States in the late 1960s and early
‘70s. Perhaps this wasn’t a conscious omission, although citing this
example may not have gone down too favourably among the Guardian’s
genteel readership. Regardless, Hermanns correctly points out that this
work is not a distraction from or substitute for electoral activity, but
a necessary complement to it.

This kind of solidarity work should not be treated as just another
method of getting out the vote, nor should it be viewed as an attempt to
soothe some charitable do-gooding impulse – building a ‘Big Society’ of
the left. Rather, it should be seen as part of the process of building a
modern-day '[world of
labour](https://newleftreview.org/I/150/ralph-miliband-the-new-revisionism-in-britain)',
renewing labour movement culture for the 21st century, and rebuilding
bridges between the Labour Party and those working-class communities
which have been neglected by it for so long.

While Corbyn needs to ensure he has a supportive party machine at his
disposal - and having already twice won a huge mandate for change in
leadership contests, he has a right to one - the existing structures of
the Labour Party are in many ways inadequate. Therefore, the task facing
Corbyn is to reorientate the way the party organises and campaigns –
turning constituency parties into hubs of ongoing discussion, education
and culture, with a democratic, participatory ethos. To succeed,
Corbynism must begin the vital process of rebuilding popular
self-confidence, and the capacity of working-class people to take real
collective control of their everyday lives.

Community solidarity work of this sort will be vital to tackling the
profound sentiments of isolation, frustration, alienation and political
powerlessness so widespread in so many British towns and cities –
including Middlesbrough, where Labour narrowly lost one local seat to
the Tories in the election just gone. However, this work and the
building of new labour movement institutions must not be an end in
itself. Rather, it should aim to lay the foundations for a mass movement
which can empower a future Labour government not just to occupy office,
but to wield power with the goal of delivering wide-ranging social
transformation.

Against the Grain
-----------------

That the Labour Party came so close to government in this election is
staggering given the circumstances. As Leo Panitch argues so
convincingly in his seminal 1986 essay ['The Impasse of Social
Democratic
Politics'](http://socialistregister.com/index.php/srv/article/view/5521#.U9VQS_ldXi4),
any attempt to shift the Labour Party meaningfully to the left
inevitably unleashes the kind of factional warfare we've seen since
2015. This unavoidably hits the party's poll ratings hard. What Corbyn’s
Labour has proved is that it can make up a great deal of this ground in
a short space of time. But there will be more factional battles to fight
over the coming months and years, and there is certainly further
turbulence to come if the Corbyn project is to do what needs to be done.

Corbynism represents a tentative, embryonic attempt to break with four
decades of neoliberalism’s ideological hegemony. Making this break
successfully would therefore require a significant escalation in the
level of popular organisation, mobilisation and political assertiveness.
In fact, this sort of activity is likely a prerequisite to win even the
kind of social-democratic concessions as outlined in Labour’s recent
election manifesto. Even the programme of the 1980s Greater London
Council placed great emphasis on mass participation. Hilary Wainwright
observes in her *Labour: A Tale of Two Parties*[^post-6-1], that this
opening up of resources and access to community groups was what
distinguished the new-left GLC from the so-called ‘gas-and-water
socialism’ which had previously been the stock-in-trade of Labour
councils.

All of this would also represent a major departure from the political
practice of orthodox labourism. As Panitch asserts in the aforementioned
essay, Labourism's traditional mode of operation has generally tended
towards the top-down, paternalistic and technocratic. Panitch observes
that this has all too often served to dampen down working-class
radicalism, curb expectations and reinforce inactivity. While Labour won
12.8 million votes in this election - certainly proving that a broad
swathe of voters are prepared to give a hearing and respond positively
to unashamedly leftwing policy offers - it would be wrong to interpret
that performance straightforwardly as 12.8 million votes for socialism.
The party’s new left must remember that it has to actively cultivate
popular support for a radical political alternative, rather than
assuming that there is sufficient support already latent, just waiting
to be tapped into.

The workings of parliamentary democracy itself - played out as they
generally are among MPs, journalists and a select coterie of hangers-on
- also tend to inculcate a deep-seated sense of subordination, deference
and passivity. Yet Labour’s message of hope, solidarity and national
renewal - and its campaign, powered by the determined efforts of
thousands of rank-and-file activists - clearly resonated with an
electorate increasingly dissatisfied by neoliberal technocracy and
austerity. Only by continuing to foster grassroots creativity and
creating new institutions for popular participation can Corbynism
succeed over the long term.

In the aforementioned book, Wainwright described labourism as
‘essentially an ideology of decent and dignified
subordination’.[^post-6-2] Corbynism offers a historic opportunity to
build a genuinely new labour movement politics, abandoning that
long-established tendency towards paternalism and technocracy for
genuine popular engagement, creativity and empowerment. Its ability to
achieve this is, ultimately, the Corbyn project’s litmus test.

Looming challenges
------------------

Community solidarity work is vital to re-embed the Labour Party in
communities and pave the way for, in time, a radical Labour government.
But this is alien to the prevailing political orthodoxy. Ordinarily, the
demands of the 24-hour 'hot take' media cycle would make it extremely
difficult for the Labour leadership to articulate this kind of strategy
without merely inviting further derision. However, the successes of
Labour’s recent election campaign - and its grassroots-based nature -
have surely earned Corbyn the right to encourage experiments. But there
is also the risk that, after such a good election result, some on the
Corbynite left underestimate the fundamental work that is required
before we are able to govern effectively from the radical left. This
would be dangerous, as we may not have much time in which to do it.

Any attempt to embark on this kind of approach would face not just
mockery from outside the Labour Party but serious opposition from within
it. The leadership's control over its party machinery is still tenuous,
and an unsupportive bureaucracy could simply withhold the resources and
logistical support necessary to make radical community organising a
reality nationwide. Members looking to open up local parties and
experiment with new methods of organising can currently expect little
support from an unreformed Labour HQ.

None of this is to suggest that the rank-and-file Labour left should
just sit around and wait for help from on high before organising in
their communities. Indeed, there is already a great deal of highly
useful and relevant experience of grassroots organising among Labour
members - the hands-on experience of anti-cuts campaigners and trade
union activists is already substantial. Rank-and-file initiative can
make substantial achievements. But for this sort of approach to solidly
take hold nationwide, an attentive and supportive central party
apparatus will be invaluable.

Already, Corbyn’s Labour has been able to establish a highly impressive
get-out-the-vote operation, as evidenced in the recent election
campaign. Legions of post-Corbyn recruits joined time-served members in
pounding pavements across the country in the hope of a Labour victory.
But previously, there had been times when the leadership seemed unsure
of what to do with its new recruits, beyond mobilising them to
successfully defend Corbyn’s leadership last summer. Given the unlikely
circumstances in which Corbyn was thrust into the leadership this was
inevitable, but the leadership must now start to provide its rank and
file supporters with clear guidance and encouragement if this project is
to progress further.

What is also required is clarity and honesty about the scale of the task
facing Labour's new left, and the nature of that task as well - to
re-establish the Labour Party as a campaigning force in working-class
communities, to democratise its policymaking structures and to bring
through the next generation of Labour left cadres, candidates and
activists. Again, articulating this effectively in the current political
environment is difficult. But Corbyn has to find ways of steeling his
supporters for the job ahead. His newly-strengthened position as leader
potentially gives him more room for manoeuvre in this regard.

Limitations and potential
-------------------------

Hermanns also writes that Labour activists could 'step in to fill the
hole' left where public services have been cut back. We should be
careful not to overstate the potential of radical community organising
programmes. Despite the real potential they hold, grassroots organising
and campaigning can do no more than partly ameliorate the damage being
done by continuing austerity. Its main purpose is to demonstrate
practical solidarity with working, oppressed and marginalised people,
hopefully going some way to regaining their trust after too many years
of neglecting their concerns and needs.

Indeed, the Labour left - whose representation in councils is still weak
- needs to start thinking seriously about local government. The days of
1980s Liverpool-esque showdowns are almost certainly over, but it is
vital for socialists in the Labour Party to begin the work of devising a
national left strategy for councils. This is a debate which has yet to
get meaningfully underway; the Labour leadership has itself appeared
reluctant to broach the topic. But there is little point getting left
councillors elected without a clear idea of how they can best use the
powers available to them. A socialist community organising drive could
inform and influence that left strategy for local government, providing
Labour activists with the experience and knowledge necessary to
drastically reshape Labour-run councils.

To be genuinely transformative and radical, community activism has to be
coupled with an ambitious, coherent and rigorous political programme
aiming at social and economic transformation. The British socialist
left, for the first time in many decades, finds itself responsible for
developing such a programme. We have to offer the people we aim to
organise among and to serve a distinctive, socialist alternative vision
of the future. Joshua Bloom and Waldo E. Martin correctly make the point
in *Black Against Empire*, their history of the Black Panthers,
[^post-6-3] that without this, community organising risks being little
more than a social service.

There is, however, a major potential pitfall. The Labour left has
capable organisers, thinkers and activists, but the Corbynite base as a
whole remains somewhat inexperienced. When Syriza entered government in
January 2015, its most capable cadres were soon drawn towards parliament
- which meant that attempts to maintain the social movement that
initially sustained it inevitably took a back seat. There is a danger of
something similar happening to Corbyn’s Labour, particularly if it were
to win a general election in the not-too-distant future.

Given the weakness of the Tories’ position in parliament, there is the
very real possibility of a left Labour government coming to office
sooner rather than later. We may therefore find that we have less time
than we had anticipated in which to develop a socialist programme that’s
equal to the task. The left must develop an adequate intellectual
infrastructure. Rank-and-file activists must be encouraged to develop
and contribute their own ideas, rather than waiting for them to come
down from on high. In addition to implementing new methods of community
campaigning, Labour’s policymaking processes must also be radically
reshaped to facilitate greater grassroots input.

There are reports that Labour Party membership is again rapidly
expanding in the wake of the general election. While there is as yet no
official confirmation, a membership potentially heading towards a
million comes with immense potential - though the Labour leadership
should mount an active recruitment drive to ensure it reaches this
target. Not only can we expect Labour to mount an even more impressive
campaign whenever the next election is called, with thousands of
activists getting to work to win a Labour government right from the
start, it also opens up the possibility of putting the Labour Party at
the heart of workplaces and communities in a way scarcely seen in
Britain before. Labour could even become as central to many communities
as the post-war Italian Communist Party was. This is evidently a hugely
exciting prospect. It is therefore incumbent upon the leadership to
engage these newcomers, and to give them the autonomy to organise and
campaign in ways they consider to serve their people.

Labour’s impressive performance in the election provides us with an
indication of just how far Corbynism has come in a short space of time.
We should take time to remind ourselves that two years ago, none of us
saw ourselves being in anything like this position at this stage.
However, the real promise of Corbynism lies less in its existing
political demands but in what it might be conducive to. Active
engagement in community and workplace-based struggles will be crucial if
Labour’s new left is to bring about the social and political renewal it
aspires to.

[^post-6-1]: Hilary Wainwright, *A Tale of Two Parties*, London,
    Hogarth, 1987, p. 28.

[^post-6-2]: Wainwright, *A Tale of Two Parties*, p. 294.

[^post-6-3]: Joshua Bloom and Waldo E. Martin, *Black Against Empire:
    The History and Politics of the Black Panther Party*, Berkley,
    University of California Press, p. 385.
