Independence is not the Same as Isolation: Political Experiences of People with Learning Disabilities/Difficulties
==================================================================================================================

by [Christopher Blewitt](https://twitter.com/chrisblewitt)

The years of the Coalition government and, from 2015, the Conservative
government have seen a marked decrease in the support and services
available to people with learning disabilities/difficulties. I would
argue that this decrease is a deliberate attack on disabled people’s
rights, welfare and access to necessary support. That is not to excuse
policies from previous years, some of which have undoubtedly contributed
to the shift in understanding of the social model of disability. The
social model of disability would suggest that people are disabled by
their society. As such, an individual may require additional support
from others, in order to navigate (and attack) these barriers and live
an ‘independent life’. Here, independence is offered through support,
but, too often, the government have used the cover of offering
‘independence’ to withdraw support.

As someone who works with people with learning
disabilities/difficulties, I have seen how this has isolated both those
seen as having high support needs and those seen as having the least
support needs, from whom support is withdrawn as they are expected to
find employment which is not adequate for their needs. However, the
experience of these policies, especially when experienced as the result
of political decisions that have affected others the same way as you,
have politicising people with learning disabilities/difficulties. This
has resulted in advocacy groups going beyond merely defensive struggles
to reevaluate what genuine independence might mean and whether a Labour
Party genuinely remodelled on compassion and hope might be able to help
deliver it.

Speaking as a non-disabled person, and as someone who works to support,
advocate for, and support self-advocacy by, people with learning
disabilities, it is important for me to insist from the start that these
are my opinions alone. They are, of course, influenced by the people I
work with and support. However, I am making no claim to be a voice for
adults with learning disabilities, only to speak as a professional who
works closely with disabled people. All the language I use here is
language that people I support use: I know that some prefer difficulties
to disabilities when discussing learning disabilities/difficulties. I
will use ‘people with LD/D’ as abbreviation here to cover that.

Changes to Support and their Effects
------------------------------------

This shift in understanding of the social model of disability is
signalled in significant changes in language. This can be seen most
clearly in the recent change of the benefit Disability Living Allowance
(DLA) to Personal Independence Payment (PIP). DLA, one of the main
benefits accessed by people with LD/D, loses its emphasis on ‘living’
and picks up a reference to ‘independence’ (this of course should not
excuse the semantic violence of a ‘living allowance’). Although it would
be very difficult to argue that a disabled person should not live an
‘independent life’, what this means has been a point of contention for
disabled people for a long time.

This semantic change is matched by policy as the state withdraws its
support under the justification that too much support leads to a
dependency that is counterproductive for a disabled person’s quality of
life. For example, those who previously thought at least one stress was
removed thanks to a long-term award of DLA (meaning years could pass
without needing to submit to unnecessary reassessment) are now facing
mandatory reassessment. They are
[“invited”](https://www.disabilityrightsuk.org/news/2016/march/dr-uk-pip-reform-briefing)
to claim Personal Independence Payment as DLA comes to the end of its
life. Reductions in benefit awards have been widespread. The cracks
extend as specialist services evaporate, and people are encouraged to
take the delightful and uplifting road of employment in order to support
themselves. Despair is often the immediate response from the people I
work with.

I work with, and support, people experiencing two quite distinct poles
of disempowerment under this government’s unique version of
‘independence’: people who are thought to have high support needs and
those who are thought to need least support. Although for those deemed
by the state to have ‘higher support needs’, financial support is made
available, as the world continues to view those with ‘more severe’ LD/D
as surplus to requirement within the ‘mainstream’ community, this
financial support remains closely managed. Offered usually with strict
parameters, the forthcoming state support for those with ‘more severe’
LD/D does little to encourage the development of that so desired
‘independent life’.

Although people access regular services and activities (those that are
left standing), they have little variation, meaning people with these
support needs remain marked and separate from ‘mainstream’ society. For
those thought of as needing the least support, services are rarely
available and the welfare income received is barely enough to sustain
any quality of life. Any additional finances needs to come from
employment. Currently, [only 6% of people with
LD/D](https://www.mencap.org.uk/get-involved/learning-disability-work-experience-week)
who are known to social services have some kind of paid work. However,
employment of course is not always the key; accessible support is
quickly melting away and treatment within workplaces remains often
denigrating and generally poor.

This is the case for one man I work with regularly. The state is
satisfied that his support requirements are minimal to none existent. He
finds himself now largely ineligible for support from the local
authority or indeed from the third sector, and so lives the life he was
encouraged to live as someone with a ‘mild learning disability’: he went
to college year after year, repeating courses, before finding work
through interactions with a charity working with people with LD/D, which
is [not an uncommon
route](http://www.scope.org.uk/Scope/media/Documents/Publication%20Directory/A-million-futures-halving-the-disability-employment-gap.pdf)
into employment for people with LD/D. However, along with the majority
of that 6%, this person’s work is [infrequent and
‘flexible’](http://www.scope.org.uk/Scope/media/Documents/Publication%20Directory/A-million-futures-halving-the-disability-employment-gap.pdf).
He summed up his, and many others’, situation by saying, “independence
is not the same as being isolated”. This is not a unique situation. As
services are withdrawn, the bludgeoning violence of a despair induced by
a seemingly rolling program of welfare reform, is widening its reach.

Political Resistance
--------------------

After seven years of directed and active immiseration (welfare reform,
rises in disability hate crime, social and health care crises), I am
seeing more and more people with LD/D connecting that these changes,
punctuated by the brown DWP envelope, are the result of concrete
political decisions. People see these barriers for what they are: a
combined and coordinated set of violences.

The cracks within which people are allowed to slip can also be fertile
ground for resistance and response. Self-advocacy and campaigning work,
‘speaking up’ groups, are developing. These groups of people coming
together and sharing their experiences of closed doors, impatient
professionals, toilet-less Jobcentres, aggressive letters and so much
more is a site for some hope. There is always power in the expression of
grievances and in the recognition that the injustice and violence you
have endured alone for so long has been shared by others. These are the
experiences people report to me often. When each speaking up group sees
another person reporting a personal variation on the themes explored
above, being denied support, struggling with money, services not
accepting them, and so on, the sadness felt can become mundane. However,
when this sadness and despair becomes the norm, it can, after a while,
stop being bludgeoning and become a basis for response. Groups now are
alive with these responses.

The responses are varied and focused on empowerment: working with local
authority mental health services to improve the accessibility of their
services; training local authority housing staff in understanding the
complexities of LD/D; supporting each other with various interactions
with the state; developing workshops around disabled people’s rights;
reaching out to organisations led and managed by disabled people to work
in partnership and to learn from each other. In the areas that my work
covers (mainly boroughs of west and central-west London), more people
appear to be prioritising self-advocacy and campaigning sessions. The
development of these spaces, spaces that are increasingly led by people
with LD/D, is crucial. These are spaces where conversations about rights
are unfiltered by conventional understandings of what it means to be a
person with LD/D: sexuality, relationships and socialising, for example,
have so long been a terrain of repression for people with LD/D. Instead
now, we see discussion of these topics in a different way.

People are also joining the dots between the different sites of struggle
they face as people with LD/D. The fact that someone has lived for 35
years through people disproving of, and actively discouraging, any
mention of romantic relationships is born, of course, of the same
mind-set that creates a punitive welfare system. These are important
issues in articulating the fact that people with LD/D are consistently
faced with challenges to living what could meaningfully be considered an
‘independent life’, in spite of professions to this being the ultimate
aim. Existence is passable for a person with LD/D: money from benefits
can be just enough to cover necessary outgoings but little or nothing
else; relationships can be friendly and jovial but ultimately surface
and shallow. Anything beyond existence - for example, a nourishing set
of romantic and platonic relationships, or spending money on things one
might enjoy doing, is seen as extravagant and undeserved.

My role in this is complicated: offering any needed support whilst also
not being overbearing. The process of offering ‘good’ support to people
with LD/D is an ever-moving process, centred on evaluating and
re-evaluating. What I can say is that (I hope!) people have begun to
take on ‘bad’ support - telling myself and others to take a step back or
do something differently. This is an experience for me that denotes an
ongoing shift in people’s attitudes to their own rights as disabled
people.

Whilst this is a personal anecdote of that attitudinal shift, it is
apparent in many other ways. The readiness of people I support to take
risks - protesting and demonstrating against the PIP reforms through to
directly complaining when a care or support provider has failed to do
its job - is seemingly ever increasing. These risks have felt
increasingly necessary in recent times, and especially because people
with LD/D are so used to being either invisible or misrepresented in
popular culture and Politics. The number of disabled MPs is minute (4 as
of May 2015) and local authority representatives [are only slightly more
representative](https://www.nfer.ac.uk/publications/LGCL01/LGCL01.pdf).
‘Who will speak for us when they never even come to listen to us?’ is
the main question I hear leveled at Westminster based Politics, and even
local Politics. Inaccessibility flows, too, into the polling booths
themselves. People I work with have told me of waiting for over an hour
before receiving any assistance. Many people do not even go so far as
the polling booth any more after previous bad experiences.

A Kinder, Gentler Politics
--------------------------

In this context, then, it is certainly interesting for me to see the
attention given to Corbyn’s edition of the Labour Party from those
people who I work with. The manifesto has been met with a fair amount of
enthusiasm. The move the party has tried to make even simply to
disengage with some of the hardest language used around benefits and
welfare is welcomed. Talk of housing, social care and the NHS is well
received, too. Whilst skepticism is far from gone, there is an
undeniable piquing of interest.

Questions remain: one person this week said that they believe the good
intentions but will remain pretty unconvinced until disabled people are
mentioned as more than a side note. When an incumbent MP came to the
group two weeks ago, he was told that whilst the commitment to new
council housing was welcome, there needed to be commitments on a good
percentage being made accessible and adaptable.

At this point in time, transforming the state feels as important as
building alternative and autonomous spaces outside of it. I struggle to
see a world where the people I am working with stop questioning party
politics. However, it seems as if that is far from a bad thing. It
certainly says to me that Corbyn’s campaign has shifted attitudes for
some. As such, my experience would say that it follows that a language
that allows empathy and compassion to take a prominent role is appealing
to people I work with. I suppose that piecing together the way I
encourage people to work is an idea of some kind of radical empathy and
care. Offering support is about consistently reevaluating what is
needed, where it is needed and why. What barriers need to be faced
before support and care can become properly affective and empowering?
What is most encouraging then, to me, is that people are starting to
feel as if the Labour Party has some realisation that within an ideology
of compassion and support are some kernels of real hope.
