Fantasy Politics
================

by [Alex Williams](https://twitter.com/lemonbloodycola)

What happens when the most firmly held of common senses meet the hard
reality of political transformation? The 2017 election result has proven
to be a live experiment in such a collision between a hegemonic ideology
and its imminent destruction. One such common sense can be identified at
work in the prevalence of fantasy cabinets being shared on social
networks, on ready display in the early weeks of the 2017 campaign.
Largely the preserve of liberal journalists, these imagined cabinets
consisted of a bizarre melange of ‘centrist’ and ‘sensible’ MPs from
different parties, seeking to create some kind of dream line-up of pure
neoliberal efficacy.

![A fantasy
frontbench](/Users/joe/Projects/nsbooks/what-sort-of-victory/data/MLC.PNG)
*A fantasy frontbench*

On the one hand, this was spurred on by the development of a [‘fantasy
frontbench’](https://www.fantasyfrontbench.com/) app, but the uses to
which it was put are telling of the mindset of a generation of opinion
makers, and the ideological environment in which they themselves have
been formed. It is in our fantasies, even those shared for amusement,
that we can locate something of the truth as it is moulded by a system
of power. In some ways harking back to the halcyon ‘rose garden’ of the
first moments of the 2010-15 Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition
government, these fantasy cabinets sought to get past the tiresome
business of actual political conflict, with its material interests,
policy programmes, and passions. Instead we were to imagine what might
put all these things to rest, a government of ‘talents’, for the
national interest.

Even after the election result itself, with the best gains in proportion
of the vote since 1945 for Corbyn’s Labour Party, there were calls for
his internal opponents to be incorporated into the new shadow cabinet.
There might be some sense in the inclusion of MPs such as former leader
Ed Miliband, who had commented during the campaign that he wished he had
run on a manifesto such as Corbyn’s, and who had been supportive during
the campaigning itself. Internal opponents such as Chuka Umunna and
Yvette Cooper are another matter entirely, having been preparing their
own leadership bids in the weeks before election day. Moreover, it was
difficult in the extreme to identify what, precisely, these alleged
luminaries were going to bring to the table – what they might add to
Corbyn’s new socialism.

Much of the appeal of this sort of fantasy politics rests on an entirely
denatured conception of what politics is, where those who have had the
best contacts in the media, and hence who have been lauded as being
uniquely talented, are put forward as being the saviours of a corrupted
system. Fantasy cabinets can here be seen to be of a piece with the
obsessive return to such cultural products as The West Wing, which
dissolved political differences in an acid of glib technocratic
competence. A powerful fantasy is apparent amongst the liberal media
class of doing away with politics all together, and replacing it with
management and marketing – a fantasy that has been all the more powerful
because of its apparent ‘reasonableness’.

We should consider such outpourings of centrist longing to be a prime
example of the post-democratic, even post-political condition which has
beset British politics over the last few decades. Such longings are at
their strongest at the very moment when the system which has nurtured
them is fading away, an almost nostalgia for that which still exists but
perhaps for not much longer. That such fantasies are reaching their
apogee should not surprise us given our moment’s apparent location at
the end of a long period of relative dynamic stability, the era of
neoliberal hegemony. This hegemonic bloc had many distinguishing
characteristics, amongst them an overarching tendency towards
post-democratisation, whether deliberately willed or merely an
acceptable side-effect.

Post-democracy, as laid out by Colin Crouch, is a condition wherein
electoral turnouts become lower, major political parties hollowed out
and with significant declines in memberships, policy platforms coalesce
around a fairly narrow ambit of options, and faith in elections as a
method to transform our world declines precipitously.[^post-18-1] The
years of Blair, Brown, and Cameron, can now be identified as being the
high tide of post-democratisation within the United Kingdom. In this
era, a key driver of the reduction in the ability of democracy to
function was the limited range of choice between the parties, their
overriding agreement on the basic rules and function of politics: a
managerialist paradigm of reformist tweaks to an economy and society set
into motion under Thatcher. This neoliberal consensus meant in turn that
professional politics attracted an ever decreasingly diverse selection
of people, famously largely restricted to PPE graduates from Oxford
University. The willing collaborators in and enablers of this
post-democratic turn were mainstream journalists (of both left-liberal
and right wing stripes), who both re-enforced the Overton window of
acceptable opinions and also the emergent star system of bland
technocratic managers which our political class had become.

![Chris Deerin playing
along](/Users/joe/Projects/nsbooks/what-sort-of-victory/data/deerin-1.PNG)
*Chris Deerin playing along*

Yet what the 2017 election offered was something quite distinct from the
decades of political gruel that had come before. Global dynamics had
begun to put serious tension upon the existing neoliberal consensus. The
Brexit vote and the election of Donald Trump in the US in 2016 were only
the most sensational symptoms of the emergent sense that politics as it
had been was shortly to be no more. As such, both the Labour and
Conservative Parties attempted (with differential degrees of success) to
offer something of a break with neoliberalism as it had been practiced.
For the Tories, and their leader, Theresa May’s chief advisor Nick
Timothy, this meant some minor shifts towards [a more nativist and
authoritarian
programme](https://www.lrb.co.uk/v38/n21/william-davies/home-office-rules).
For Labour, this entailed a dramatic shift in the direction of travel
towards a social democratic offer, including revoking or reforming some
hallmark neoliberal policies such as privatisation of certain public
services, higher education fees, and elements of austerity.

What was driving liberal journalists' recent dive into fantasy politics
and the development of absurd cabinets was simply the fact that they no
longer liked or understood politics as it was playing out. With a
significant choice between Labour and Conservative parties, the
political had returned. In its wake, there was a sense that our media
class were deeply uneasy, leading to all kinds of phantasmagoric
projections of post-political or anti-political centrism. The
significant differences between the policy programmes and political
outlooks of the two major parties meant that the usual liberal
journalistic practices, largely centred on gossip, personality politics,
and often dubious psephology, had fallen away. Though the real material
conflicts in our society, along class, racial, and gender lines had
never disappeared (and indeed have in many senses been heightened) the
role of political journalism under the neoliberal consensus operated
largely to conceal them. Yet it was increasingly clear over the course
of the campaign that these conflicts were returning to the fore. Rather
than a contest based on who could be presented as the most
‘professional’ or ‘effective’, an election of marketing and consensus,
this was a full-blooded return to a politics driven by conflicts &
interests.

As the election result and the week which has followed has demonstrated,
the politics of the neoliberal era is crashing to an abrupt conclusion.
We can see in the election of Jeremy Corbyn as leader of the Labour
Party in September 2015 the beginning of a new and very different
fantasy of what is possible within the politics of the UK – one which
had of necessity to begin at the level of the fantastic, the improbable,
even the impossible. At every stage Corbyn, his supporters, and the
politics they supported were seen as retrograde, juvenile, inherently
ridiculous, and overwhelmingly impractical. Yet they have proven capable
of accelerating the most significant hegemonic break in the UK for
decades. What had been a ludicrous fantasy a mere handful of weeks ago
is now fast becoming real. The post-political and post-democratic dreams
of our media elites, a symptom of the broader malaise and dysfunction of
our parliamentary politics over the last forty years, should shrink and
die in the light of these new times. In their wake, it is our duty to
dream again, to imagine and force into being a new democratic culture,
one resolutely resistant to the reactionary desire to be done with
politics.

[^post-18-1]: Colin Crouch, *Post-Democracy*, London, Polity, 2004.
