Full Corbynism: Constructing a new left Political Economy beyond Neoliberalism
==============================================================================

by [Joe Guinan](https://twitter.com/joecguinan) and [Thomas M.
Hanna](https://twitter.com/ThomasMHanna)

‘There are three stages’, Sidney Webb wrote in a Fabian Society pamphlet
in 1890, ‘through which every new notion in England has to pass: ‘It is
impossible: It is against the Bible: We knew it before’.’[^post-21-1]
This month’s sensational election result means that Corbynism is now
rocketing toward the latter stage, consolidating its position as the new
common sense on the left of British politics. Granted, Jeremy Corbyn’s
Labour didn’t win. Outright victory on 8 June was never likely given the
party’s weak prior standing, and would have required a seismic shift far
greater than could reasonably be expected in a landscape fractured and
divided by Brexit. Nevertheless, what Corbyn and his team pulled off –
against all odds, and in the teeth of an overwhelmingly hostile media
and [continual sabotage from
within](https://newsocialist.org.uk/a-vow-of-silence-a-chronicle-of/) –
is truly remarkable. The Labour Party is now a government-in-waiting,
poised for the next General Election, which could come at any time and
could easily carry Corbyn into Downing Street as Prime Minister.

Before turning to the immense responsibility that now falls on the
shoulders of the Labour left and the broad movement at its back, it’s
worth savouring the accomplishment. When Theresa May fired the starting
gun for a snap election and unusually short campaign, Corbyn was more
than twenty points behind in most polls. According to YouGov, the
polling company whose predictions turned out to be most accurate, on the
day Labour’s manifesto was released May was on course for a
parliamentary majority of more than seventy. Despite one of the worst
campaigns in living memory, she actually achieved a vote share
comparable to Margaret Thatcher’s in 1983. That this didn’t translate
into a sizeable majority is down to the ‘Corbyn Surge’, an unprecedented
turnaround in public opinion.

Corbyn deftly prized apart what had seemed an unbeatable electoral bloc
around Brexit, largely through direct engagement with the underlying
economic issues. He ended up taking 40 per cent of the vote on a
9.5-point swing, the largest increase in Labour’s share since Clement
Attlee in 1945. Corbyn’s electoral appeal to previously out-of-reach
sections of the public such as the young has also proved extraordinary.
Turnout among 18-24 year olds shot up from around 43 per cent in 2015 to
58 per cent last week, and Corbyn’s name is being [chanted in
nightclubs](https://twitter.com/joecguinan/status/874431903075631105)
across the country. Labour also carried 55 per cent of 35-44 year olds,
compared to 29 per cent for the Conservatives. Opinion surveys since the
election have placed Labour ahead by five or six points – 45-39 in a
recent Survation poll. Amid the rubble of May’s hegemonic ambitions can
also be found the wreckage of yesterday’s received political wisdom. The
establishment punditocracy, including its nominally left wing, has been
repeatedly wrong-footed by events and lacks credibility as to what is
and is not possible in Britain in 2017. We have arrived at a new
conjuncture.

Labour is now on a permanent war footing and is a realistic contender
for office. As a result, the left must now get much more serious about
policy and strategy. Embracing the magnitude of this historic
opportunity, the task is now to put flesh on the bones of a
transformational agenda capable of living up to the hopes and responding
to the deep structural challenges of a fluid and rapidly changing
political and economic landscape. To consolidate the ambitious project
they have initiated, Corbyn and Shadow Chancellor John McDonnell must
follow through on the construction of a radical new left political
economy. The responsibility is enormous. As [McDonnell has
said](http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/labour-government-jeremy-corbyn-most-radical-ever-shadow-chancellor-john-mcdonnell-clement-attlee-a7041311.html),
‘I want us to surpass even the Attlee government for radical reform. The
situation demands nothing less’.

Getting elected may be the easy part. There is a strong possibility that
a Corbyn government will take power in the midst of the greatest crisis
of confidence in the British economy since the end of the Second World
War. Only by re-establishing broad control over the national economy can
the left hope to manage the coming period of pain and dislocation that
will occur as a result of exit from the European Union, not to mention
the further shocks – inevitable, and therefore to be confronted squarely
– that will stem from any attempt to substantially unwind neoliberalism.
Without wishing to be alarmist, it’s increasingly evident that a high
price will be exacted from any left government with the temerity to
pursue serious departures from the status quo. ‘The roof will fall in’,
warns Ray McAnally as radical Labour Prime Minister Harry Perkins in *A
Very British Coup*. Capital flight, investment strikes, foreign exchange
crises, trade retaliation – all are possible, whether as market
reactions or deliberately administered punishment beatings.

Careful planning and strategy will thus be critical. In this regard,
there may be important partial models to be found in past instances of
capitalist crisis management. One example that springs to mind is the
contingency plan – known as ‘the unmentionable’ and kept locked in a
cupboard at HM Treasury – for trade and capital controls drawn up for
deployment in the event of failure of the 1976 IMF talks.[^post-21-2]
The strong policy measures taken by a number of developed and developing
countries in response to the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis and the 2008
Great Financial Crisis are another potential source of ideas.

Unused to operating at such levels of technical detail, it’s essential
that the left now begins thinking along these lines. With very few
exceptions, the think tanks and liberal commentariat won’t lead on this,
though some may follow. The stakes could hardly be higher. For all the
wrenching dislocations, someone has got to go first in successfully
creating a new economic model beyond neoliberalism. The agonies of
Syriza in Greece – a popular left government of the damned, neutered and
humiliated, condemned to implement the very policies it was elected to
oppose – provide a cautionary tale, a memento mori of the costs of
taking on the international economic order unprepared. Britain, though,
is not Greece, and we should take our chances. How fitting it would be
if the first advanced industrial economy to provide a testing ground for
neoliberal policies were to be the first to fully re-emerge, blinking
into the sunlight, as the long dark night of neoliberalism draws to a
close.

The Manifesto and Beyond
------------------------

Not since the ’seventies and early ’eighties – when the party was
committed to bringing about what Tony Benn termed ‘a fundamental and
irreversible shift in the balance of power and wealth in favour of
working people and their families’ – has Labour put forward as bold a
plan for the transformation of Britain as is contained in the 2017
manifesto, [*For the Many Not the
Few*](http://www.labour.org.uk/page/-/Images/manifesto-2017/Labour%20Manifesto%202017.pdf).
Policies ranging from increasing the minimum wage and abolishing zero
hours contracts to raising taxes on the rich and introducing rent
control are generally popular. Scrapping tuition fees proved to be a hit
with younger voters, who not only turned out in higher numbers but broke
overwhelmingly for Labour. Re-nationalising railways and utilities –
policies that were jumped on by the right-wing press as evidence of
Labour’s hard left turn – are also supported by large numbers of
Britons.

Although widely described as a social democratic programme, For the Many
Not the Few in fact contains the seeds of a radical transformation
beyond social democracy. Policies such as establishing a national
investment fund to help ‘rebuild communities ripped apart by
globalization’, linking public sector procurement to a regionally
balanced industrial strategy, creating a national investment bank and
new local publicly-owned banks, and democratising the economy by
supporting public and worker ownership begin to provide a vision of a
break with established economic orthodoxies. In combination with a
commitment to devolving and decentralising power and decision-making to
local communities and forming a Constitutional Convention that ‘will
look at extending democracy locally, regionally and nationally,
considering the option of a more federalised country’, the contours of a
very different pattern of political economy begin to emerge.

It’s [long been
clear](http://renewal.org.uk/articles/the-radical-potential-of-democratising-capital)
that to survive in the era of austerity social democracy would have to
turn radically to the left. There can be no going back to either the
post-war Golden Age or the Third Way settlement. In the former,
redistributive social spending and welfare state expansion were linked
to the post-war boom. Even before the oil shocks of the ’seventies the
terms of this boom were being called into question, as productivity
waned and capitalists, facing declining rates of profit, sought new ways
to outflank increasingly emboldened mass trade union movements. When
stagflation undermined Keynesianism, social democrats had no
alternatives to hand – in part because, as Robin Blackburn has argued,
they ‘failed to enlist the mass of working people … \[and\] left
untouched the central dynamic of the private accumulation
process’.[^post-21-3] The Third Way, in turn, relied on full
accommodation to neoliberalism in order to skim off the surplus for
ameliorative social spending, a strategy that first ran aground and then
collapsed with the financial crash and the end of the growth upon which
it depended. Social democrats have since been bereft of a programme,
defaulting to a position as the left wing of austerity with disastrous
results. What Corbyn has demonstrated should have been obvious for a
while now. Ordinary people are way ahead of the politicians and pundits,
they know that things are not working – and want to hear an authentic
political message about change that will make a difference.

Corbynism contains the seeds of something very different, but it will
only succeed if it can energize its mass membership and the wider
British public around a transformative vision. The starting point is the
wildly popular ‘offer’ contained in the manifesto. This must now be
augmented by a comprehensive plan of action capable of truly addressing
the growing social, economic, and ecological challenges Britain is
facing – from inequality and failing democratic legitimacy to climate
change and increasing labour market precarity. At the core of such a
programme is a new set of models, institutions, and strategies that, if
put in place, would in and of themselves produce vastly improved
societal outcomes.

The scaffolding of this emerging new approach can be found in
[McDonnell’s ‘new
economics’](http://www.labour.org.uk/blog/entry/the-new-economics),
especially regarding alternative ownership forms. A few days before the
election Labour released [*Alternative Models of
Ownership*](http://www.labour.org.uk/page/-/PDFs/9472_Alternative%20Models%20of%20Ownership%20all_v4.pdf),
a report to McDonnell and Rebecca Long-Bailey, Shadow Secretary of State
for Business and Industrial Strategy, by a group of cutting edge
theorists and practitioners. An extended review of this extraordinary
document can be found [here on *New
Socialist*](https://newsocialist.org.uk/labours-alternative-models-of-ownership-report/).
Suffice it to say that the report represents the most exciting economic
programme to be developed by the Labour Party in forty years. It models
the way in which the wider left should now be rolling up its sleeves and
getting to work, going beyond rhetoric to detailed institutional design
and policy formulation. There are submerged but long-standing left
traditions that can be drawn upon to reanimate the old promise of
economic democracy as we explore new avenues for the wholesale
democratisation of the economy and society.

None of this is about selling a fantasy. Real-world examples of
democratic, participatory economic alternatives already exist (or
previously existed) in communities across the globe. They illuminate how
practical new approaches can generate innovative solutions to deep
underlying problems. They embody new design principles, relying not on
regulatory fixes or ‘after-the-fact’ redistribution but on fundamental
structural changes in the economy and the nature of ownership and
control over productive wealth that go right to the heart of our current
difficulties – and are capable of producing greatly improved and
politically and ecologically sustainable outcomes.

Ultimately, a deep and thoroughgoing break with neoliberalism will be
required. Britain’s departure from the European Union, despite
near-universal lamentation on the left, is a significant opportunity,
over time, to fundamentally recast the basic operations of the British
economy in a far more radical direction than would ever be permissible
under EU competition law and single market regulation. A range of
instruments and policy options – from public ownership and procurement
to industrial strategy and managed trade – that are [discouraged or
outright forbidden by the EU
treaties](https://www.opendemocracy.net/uk/thomas-m-hanna-joe-guinan/is-another-europe-possible)
will soon be available. We must make the most of them.

A radical Agenda
----------------

The elaboration of a full policy programme for a radical Labour
government should be a process of collective endeavour, drawing upon the
manifold talents, viewpoints, and experience of the wider movement
behind Corbynism. Labour’s [National Policy
Forum](http://www.labour.org.uk/index.php/npf-2017/), as inherited by
the current leadership, seems entirely unfit for such a purpose, as if
it were specifically designed to undermine the ability of the membership
to influence policy. Lest precious movement energy be wasted on an
unproductive process, it should be quickly overhauled and democratised.
In the meantime, the aforementioned *Alternative Models of Ownership*
report suggests the possibilities inherent in reviving the rich
tradition of [discussion documents and
pamphleteering](http://renewal.org.uk/articles/bring-back-the-institute-for-workers-control)
that played such an important role in the development of Labour’s last
radical programme, the Alternative Economic Strategy (AES), which for a
decade in the late ’seventies and early ’eighties represented the left’s
alternative to both Keynesianism and neoliberalism.[^post-21-4]

It is in such a spirit that the following suggestions are presented, the
broad brush strokes of a possible agenda for ‘Full Corbynism’ – a
proposed political economy for the British left based on new
institutions and approaches and the centrality of ownership and control,
democracy and sustainability, participation and decentralisation. They
are offered up as a contribution to a [necessary discussion and
debate](https://newsocialist.org.uk/economics/) about what it would
actually take to build a better economy and society in Britain in the
twenty-first century, based on socialist principles of equality,
democracy, community, and sustainability.

Democratic Ownership
--------------------

Slowly but surely, the attractions of worker ownership and control are
creeping back up the UK political agenda, given their suitability as
instruments for tackling inequality and allowing ordinary people to
‘take back control’ over their lives and the economy as a whole. Even
Theresa May talked about adding worker representation to company boards
(she quickly backed down in the face of corporate opposition). The
Labour manifesto calls for a ‘right to own’, which would give workers
the right of first refusal when their companies are up for sale. Public
authorities in the UK should be actively supporting and funding the
incubation and expansion of worker cooperatives as part of their [local
economic development
strategies](https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2017/apr/11/preston-cleveland-model-lessons-recovery-rust-belt).
As is suggested in the Alternative Models of Ownership report, Labour
should also investigate the benefits and limitations of Employee Stock
Ownership Plans (ESOPs), which could dramatically increase worker
ownership with little risk or cost to workers.

There are huge potential benefits from pursuing a massive expansion of
democratic ownership of enterprises, given the opportunity presented by
the coming ‘silver tsunami’ of retiring baby boomer business owners and
the succession question this raises for large numbers of small and
medium-sized companies. A large worker-owned and cooperative sector
could form an important institutional base for a new place-based
economics and politics – one that is capable of overturning simplistic
notions of ‘pro- or anti-business’ and replacing them with new
alignments around re-circulatory local economies built on multipliers in
opposition to extractive multinational corporations.

Money and Banking
-----------------

The City sits atop one of the most highly financialised economies in the
world, with rentier concerns long predominating over productive
investment or social need. Britain needs a new approach that puts
banking, credit creation, and investment at the service of the real
economy and public priorities. The Labour manifesto promises ‘to
transform how our financial system operates’ through increased
regulation of financial firms and creating a ‘more diverse banking
system’ to drive investment to localities and regions. This would
include creation of a national investment bank and a possible break up
of RBS into smaller, publicly owned banks. Over time, we should be
moving in the direction of a more fully democratic, public-benefiting
model at the community, regional, and national levels. There are a host
of possibilities for more democratic finance, from public and postal
banking systems to mutuals, credit unions, and fintech innovations that
support peer-to-peer lending. Woven together, a new money and banking
system could allow for more active fiscal and monetary policy to
allocate credit in the economy toward social, environmental, and
community development purposes.

The left needs to better understand the [macroeconomics of
money](http://www.renewal.org.uk/articles/modern-money-and-the-escape-from-austerity).
There is actually a ‘Magic Money Tree’. It is to be found on
Threadneedle Street, where it has been located since 1734 – the Bank of
England. The operations of central bankers tell us a great deal about
what is possible, beyond false notions of scarcity of money that
underpin austerity. With a few keystrokes, the Bank of England produced
[over £500 billion in new money via ‘quantitative
easing’](http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Pages/apf/default.aspx)
as part of an effort to rescue the private commercial banks from their
reckless behaviour and stimulate the economy following the financial
crash. It’s high time we had a conversation about how to better use this
tremendous sovereign monetary power that is at our disposal.

Finally, there is the matter of what to do about the City. London is the
largest foreign exchange market in the world, with around \$1.2 trillion
per day in spot transactions and derivatives trades. At two hundred
times nominal UK GDP, these flows are clearly not financing domestic
production. Nor are they financing U.S.-European trade, which they
exceed by a factor of four hundred.[^post-21-5] What they are about is
providing liquidity to markets – leading to asset price inflation,
particularly of London real estate prices, and the hollowing out of
other sectors of the UK economy. Critics point to a debilitating
‘finance curse’ from this large and over-mighty financial sector – akin
to the infamous ‘resource curse’ afflicting economies endowed with too
many valuable natural resources. Beyond separation of retail and
investment banking, as promised in the manifesto, Labour should seize
upon the historically unique opportunity afforded by Brexit to throw the
City under the bus, using the loss of EU ‘passporting rights’ to vastly
shrink speculative trading, assert public control over finance, and
rebalance the UK economy back toward real production and social needs.

Managed Trade and Capital Flows
-------------------------------

Given that Brexit looms, it’s critical that the left begins to set out a
plausible trade model, for application in both the short and longer
term. This must allow for a Britain considerably less exposed to
international trade and finance, one of the areas in which the
contemporary left has shown the least economic imagination. Once the
preserve of the alter-globalisation movement, critiques of ‘free trade’
agreements, offshoring, and unrestricted capital flows have increasingly
becoming the political property of the populist right, of Trump and Le
Pen, with dangerous consequences in regions ravaged by disinvestment and
deindustrialisation. Globalisation and liberal trade are peculiar causes
to have been taken up by socialists, given that they serve to
automatically foreclose or undermine virtually every strategy,
experiment, and new institutional direction a renewed left can and
should embrace.

What is needed is a re-conceptualisation of managed trade that goes
beyond archaic protectionism to instead provide actual protection – for
democratic autonomy, locally embedded economies, and the policy space
required for a new approach to regional and national development. A new
model of managed trade and capital controls would open up the prospect
of reindustrialisation, improved economic and job security, and
community stability – thereby blunting the edge of rising anti-immigrant
sentiment. It would also offer the basis for genuine solidarity and
economic support for communities in the global South. The left’s
solution to labour arbitrage, [as we’ve argued
before](http://www.renewal.org.uk/articles/polanyi-against-the-whirlwind),
will be found in the direction of anchoring capital, not people.

Industrial Strategy
-------------------

In Britain, many of the challenges of post-industrial decline remain
starkly present. Entire communities have been thrown on the scrap heap,
with all that implies in terms of associated capital and carbon costs
and wasted lives. It is time the left revisited the possibilities
inherent in an aggressive industrial strategy, both locally and
nationally.

A true community-sustaining industrial strategy would consist, in the
broadest sense, of the deliberate direction of capital to sectors,
localities, and regions so as to balance out market trends and prevent
communities from falling into decay, while also ensuring the investment
in research and development necessary to maintain a highly productive
economy. In some cases this might mean assistance in allowing workers to
buy up facilities and keep them running. In other cases, it might
involve re-training workers for new skills and re-fitting facilities for
work in a different industry. In either case, affected localities and
populations would be able to participate in planning and draw upon
public resources whose aim is to help secure the long-term stability of
community and, overall, to sustain national production in key sectors
and industries.

Community-sustaining policy to preserve particular places can be married
to sector-based approaches. Green manufacturing strategies and services
(such as home and business energy retrofits) can support the building
and sustaining of demand and production capacities for ecologically
sustainable forms of energy and technology. An industrial strategy
designed to underpin a Green New Deal could help Britain overcome
multiple economic challenges. It could provide high-wage jobs, generate
revenue, expand exports, and reduce trade deficits – all while reducing
greenhouse gas emissions and improving air quality and public health.

A key principle underlying a community-supporting industrial strategy
must be the preservation of existing communities and their productive
capacities on a long-term basis. Deals like that with Nissan that keep
factories open for a time but allow private owners to scale back or
close them at their convenience do not merit the public subsidies and
support they currently receive. A democratic, participatory industrial
strategy would help ensure that productive capacities stay in use in
such circumstances and provide guidance on how to organise conversion
when a shift to a different product is required. Depending on the needs
and desires of the community, as well as economic considerations, this
may mean adopting some form of community, public, or worker ownership.
In the long-term, it may also entail the conversion of certain
industries, such as armaments, to socially beneficial purposes.

Municipal Socialism
-------------------

The centralisation and consolidation of state power throughout the
twentieth century supplanted long-standing socialist traditions of local
economic autonomy and experimentation. This has left communities at the
mercy of shifts in national policy and global markets, leading to all
too many discarded cities, regions, and people. In line with the
well-known principle of *subsidiarity*, political-economic power
wherever possible should be decentralised and devolved back to the
lowest appropriate level.

A particular source of inspiration is the history of [municipal
socialism](https://www.opendemocracy.net/uk/thomas-hanna-joe-guinan/democracy-and-decentralisation-are-their-watchwords-for-corbyn-and-mcdonn),
both in Britain and elsewhere, and how local economic autonomy can allow
for the development and deployment of political power (backed by strong
movements and institutions) from the ground up. Economic experimentation
and innovation in local ‘laboratories of democracy’ can also produce
powerful demonstration effects for other localities and become the basis
for new national policies – as happened, famously, with mutual health
provision in the Welsh mining valleys as a forerunner to Bevan’s
National Health Service.

There are openings today for experimentation and progress at the local
and regional level throughout Britain. The celebrated [‘Preston
Model’](http://thenextsystem.org/the-preston-model/) of community wealth
building – based on the principles and work of our own organisation,
[The Democracy Collaborative](http://democracycollaborative.org), in
Cleveland, Ohio – is one such direction, deploying public procurement
and the stabilising power of place-based economic anchor institutions to
set about the [democratic transformation of the municipal and regional
economy](http://www.renewal.org.uk/articles/the-road-to-socialism-is-the-a59-the-preston-model).
It suggests the potential basis for a new institutional underpinning for
socialist politics, building support for the new economics from the
ground up in a way that is far less scary and more comprehensible in a
municipal context than it can sometimes appear at the national level.

Public Ownership
----------------

Increasing inequality, poverty, environmental degradation and the
catastrophic threat of climate change, together with a general sense of
an impoverished public sphere and loss of economic control wrought by
decades of privatisation and globalisation, are pushing activists and
theorists back in the direction of public ownership. As Labour’s
manifesto makes clear, it’s time to set out the role of an expanded and
fundamentally reimagined UK public sector – from the ownership of
enterprise, to the promotion of innovation, to healthcare and education
and the production of knowledge.

As calls for public ownership grow, many activists and thinkers engaged
in its recovery and rehabilitation have already decided against a simple
return to the top-down centralised public corporation model of the
post-war period. The fightback against [privatisation of public
services](https://www.opendemocracy.net/ourkingdom/joe-guinan-thomas-m-hanna/privatisation-very-british-disease)
has been accompanied by the adoption of innovative new approaches to
collective ownership. In this view, worker ownership, consumer
cooperatives, municipal enterprise and a host of kindred institutional
forms all represent ways in which assets and enterprises can be held in
common by small and large publics – including through hybrid models that
draw upon two or more institutional forms. From the [We Own
It](https://weownit.org.uk) campaign and the [Municipal Services
Project](http://www.municipalservicesproject.org) to new ‘public-public
partnerships’ in water and other sectors, we are seeing the emergence of
a [more pluralistic approach to public
ownership](http://www.renewal.org.uk/articles/whos-afraid-of-public-ownership).
The question for the British left at this point should not be a
technical economic one about efficiency – the literature shows that
public ownership is decidedly not inherently less efficient – but rather
a political one about power, democracy, the social benefits of
ownership, and which particular forms of collective enterprise we might
wish to promote. 

Collective Capital
------------------

Employee pension funds have grown exponentially to the point where they
now represent one of the largest pools of investment capital in the
world. If workers were to exercise their collective ownership rights
over these deferred earnings, and to express their social and economic
priorities through their funds’ investment decisions, it could shake our
present economic system to its core. If there is to be a serious attempt
to construct an alternative socialist political economy for the
twenty-first century, pension fund assets are an obvious place to start
because workers already own that capital – and because the ongoing
crisis of the welfare state and the demographic changes taking place in
advanced industrial countries mean that there is the potential for
building political momentum for a different kind of pension regime.

Shifting even a portion of labour’s collective capital into local
community development, democratised forms of ownership, and new public
infrastructure would be a powerful transition strategy, one that
simultaneously increases worker and public control over the means of
production and decreases the power of finance capital. The left should
also examine the potential application of other collective capital
strategies, such as sovereign wealth funds and public trusts – including
their possible use as real productive assets to backstop proposals for a
basic income or other socialised income streams from capital.

Democratic Planning
-------------------

If our new economic institutions are not to float helplessly in the sea
of the capitalist marketplace, future left strategies will likely need
to include substantial planning capacities and functions. In a political
context still dominated by neoliberal orthodoxy, *planning* remains an
even dirtier word than *nationalisation* – even though it is widespread
in the internal decision-making of large private corporations, many of
which are bigger economic entities than some countries. Given the
pressing demands of climate change, including the radical unevenness of
its impacts, the next few decades will doubtless require a considerably
greater role for economic planning than has been the case in the last
few decades.

Advances in technology and computational power can now sustain far more
sophisticated planning systems than could be dreamt of in the twentieth
century. However, experience demonstrates that such planning must be
made democratic and participatory as well as effective. A starting point
is the contemporary opportunity to establish and expand participatory
budgeting at the municipal level, creating neighbourhood assemblies in
towns, cities, and counties that can take on a more robust role in
charting their own economic course. Another element is the empowerment
of democratised municipal and regional economic planning commissions,
comprised of directly elected representatives, stakeholder
representatives, and representatives from local citizens’ assemblies.
Such a system could give real economic decision-making power to a new
generation of devolved local and regional authorities across the country
that would be very different from the managerialist model of neoliberal
executive mayors.

There’s also the possibility that, given the scale of economic and
ecological challenges, such institutions and processes would need to sit
within a democratic national economic planning system. This would be
necessary in one form or another in order to facilitate several aspects
of the above agenda, particularly industrial strategy and trade.

Land and the Commons
--------------------

Land and real property ownership is, and always has been, of fundamental
importance in determining the distribution of wealth and power.
Once-great cities have fallen into decay, whole regions been left
behind, as elsewhere haphazard growth and speculation push out the poor
and vulnerable. In London and other major cities, enormous pressures are
being placed upon affordable land and housing by property speculation
that has become synonymous with today’s financialised capitalism.
Landlordism can also be quite literally deadly, as in the horrendous
Grenfell Tower fire disaster. At the same time, the geography of
neoliberalism is creating wastelands in many parts of the UK, which now
boasts the widest regional economic disparities in Europe.  
Democratising the ownership of land and housing and increasing community
control over urban and rural development are critical for stabilising
local communities – both economically and in terms of population – in
both strong and weak ‘market’ cities. However, the left’s answer cannot
simply be to seek to ensure more people have access to ‘the market’ or
improve state regulation of ‘the market.’ Rather, it should be to
encourage movement toward decommodification and a commons-based approach
whereby communities can self-organise to manage and steward their own
land and housing resources. There are a variety of historical examples
and precedents for this approach, including community buyouts of land in
Scotland, community land trusts in the United States, public housing in
Vienna, and the vision and models of the tenant’s movement in Britain.

Onward to Victory
-----------------

The above is a only a preliminary sketch, suggestive of some possible
elements of a more developed new left political economy. Any such
strategy and programme must also be situated within some of the most
interesting and complex debates that are raging at the moment, regarding
technology, automation, productivity, basic income, race, gender, and
care. It’s certainly the case that technological unemployment is
accelerating, but suggestions that universal leisure may be just around
the corner seem premature, to say the least. British workers toil among
the longest hours of any OECD workforce and productivity is painfully
low. Gains to GDP in recent years have largely come from the continual
addition to the economy of low-wage immigrant labour. Chronic
underinvestment in plant and skills remains the true ‘British disease’.

Labour must also lift up the importance of care work, which is so
essential but often left out of our official economic accounting. This
raises important questions regarding the current gendered division of
household labour and care, which should be redistributed and, in some
cases, socialised. We must explore such proposed policy options as a
basic income or job guarantee, as well as new community structures –
from co-housing to the spatial re-organisation of work and family life –
and practices – such as a rebirth of civic participation and voluntary
work. These possibilities connect back to the visions of past socialists
such as Oscar Wilde and William Morris, and to more contemporary demands
of socialist feminists for a post-work society.

Many of the necessary tools and strategies already exist to enable the
British left to construct a new political economy based on alternative
economic institutions and approaches and the centrality of ownership,
control, democracy, and participation. Given the growing systemic
challenges facing our politics and economics – not to mention the
biosphere – it’s imperative that we begin thinking and planning for the
long haul, as well as developing strategies that contain the potential
of creating – as neoliberalism was able to do in a different way – a new
politics and culture based on a new notion of collective agency and
citizenship. In this way we can aim to generate the political-economic
transformation Britain so urgently needs – and, in so doing, create a
powerful new model for emulation far beyond our borders.

For the British left, Corbynism is now the only game in town. [We’re
just getting
started](https://newsocialist.org.uk/this-is-just-the-beginning-corbynisms-next-steps/).
Ours will be a Long Revolution, but it’s underway at last.

[^post-21-1]: S.Webb, *English Progress Toward Social Democracy*, Fabian
    Tract No. 15, 1890.

[^post-21-2]: K.Burk and A.Cairncross, *Goodbye Great Britain: The 1976
    IMF Crisis*, New Haven, Yale University Press, 1992, p89.

[^post-21-3]: R.Blackburn, *Banking on Death, or, Investing in Life: The
    History and Future of Pensions*, London, Verso, 2002, p506.

[^post-21-4]: Conference of Socialist Economists London Working Group,
    *The Alternative Economic Strategy: A Labour Movement Response to
    the Economic Crisis*, London, CSE Books, 1980.

[^post-21-5]: J.Toporowski, ‘Brexit and the Discreet Charm of Haute
    Finance’, in D.Bailey and L.Budd, eds., *The Political Economy of
    Brexit*, Newcastle: Agenda, 2017, pp38-39.
