Northern Ireland: Past and Present, Real and Imaginary
======================================================

by [Conor McFall](https://twitter.com/ConorMcFall)

In mainstream British political discussion, Northern Ireland is regarded
as a thing that happened rather than a place that exists; the country in
its current form and the issues it faces, are all but ignored. When it
is alluded to, it is done so with such embarrassingly poor understanding
that people here would rather just go back to being forgotten about.
Instead, the North is primarily invoked in our political discourse to
discuss its ‘bad old days’. There has been an explosion in coverage of
The Troubles era in recent weeks as it has become the primary mode of
right-wing attack upon Corbyn and his alleged sympathies toward the IRA.
It will not come as much surprise that much of this hysteria is based on
binary and wilfully ignorant understanding of the conflict, in which the
IRA were one of three primary participants.

The Troubles are often presented as a battle between violent extremist
terrorists against ‘British Law & Order’; a simple good and evil tale
where Britain, as always, is standing up for its values against those
who hate them. In British political culture, any conceptual
understanding of history going further back than 20 years is dominated
by cliché. Thus, the IRA have been completely divorced from any of the
wider history of Northern Ireland, where the legacy of British
imperialism is laid bare.

Past
----

> All I boast is that we are a Protestant Parliament and Protestant
> State <cite>James Craig, first Prime Minister of Northern Ireland, 24
> April 1934</cite>

The Northern Irish state was established as a compromise in 1921. It was
something that no one wanted. Following the War of Independence,
representatives from the new Irish state signed the Anglo-Irish Treaty
under pressure of a continued war effort from the British. This
partitioned the island into two states of 26 and 6 counties
respectively. Stemming from plantations begun by James I in 1606 and
following hundreds of years of migration, the North of Ireland had a
large Protestant population that was overwhelmingly unionist. Although
initially sceptical, the unionist leadership accepted the compromise of
partition and set about establishing total political, social and
economic domination of its new state. Placed in the context of wider
imperial development, the North of Ireland seems somewhat typical.
Plantations and colonisation were integral facets of imperial projects,
while partition was a favoured tactic of the British in the 20th
century: India/Pakistan and Israel/Palestine being the most obvious
examples. A rudimentary grasp of history is enough to guess what would
follow.

The Unionists controlled the Northern Irish government for the entirety
of its existence, presiding over a state where the rump
Catholic/nationalist population suffered from a disproportionate lack of
employment, structural discrimination in housing allocation and a rigged
voting system that gerrymandered constituency boundaries and allowed
votes only for property and business owners, favouring the wealthier
Protestant population. Meanwhile, the Special Powers Act allowed the
deeply partisan police force to conduct stop and search programmes and
arrest without trial. Relatively subdued IRA campaigns in the 1950s came
to nothing and the drudgery and immiseration continued. Civil rights
organisations emerged in the 1960s, inspired by African-American
activists in the United States, took to the streets in opposition to
sectarian discrimination. Marchers were met by violence from loyalist
gangs and the police, leading to the eruption of the Battle of the
Bogside in Derry. Marchers were attacked and Catholics were burned out
of their homes. British troops were deployed to 'keep the peace', and
would not depart for almost forty years.

This parade of sectarian violence – a culmination of decades of
oppression – is that was the backdrop for the emergence of figures like
Martin McGuinness onto the national scene. The IRA, long dormant,
re-emerged initially to protect Catholic areas. However, following a
split in the organisation, the Provisional IRA fronted by McGuinness and
Gerry Adams embarked on an armed struggle to rid Ireland of British rule
altogether.

The next few years were amongst the most violent of the conflict and, as
they had done 50 years before, the British government returned to its
colonial repertoire in response. Indeed, police officials who had
overseen operations in Malaya and Kenya were placed in key positions by
the government. Atrocities such as the Bloody Sunday killings, in which
13 peaceful protesters were shot dead by the British army, and the
Ballymurphy massacre, which claimed the lives of 11 civilians in West
Belfast, repulsed the nationalist population. Regular stop-and-search
became a fact of life for young men in working-class Catholic areas, and
over 1000 of them were detained under the Operation Demetrius internment
policy. This brought about a drastic intensification of conflict as the
structural and then physical violence of the British state radicalised
young nationalists to commit to armed struggle.

Another issue ignored in the conventional media narrative of the
Troubles was the widespread unionist militancy of this period. The
conflict was not simply a battle between the IRA and British state
forces - there was also the element of loyalist extremism expressed both
through hardline Protestant firebrands like Ian Paisley and armed
paramilitary groups. It must be remembered that the initial attempts to
establish a power-sharing cross-community government was brought down by
unionism, not the IRA. The Sunningdale Agreement was brought down by the
Ulster Workers Council, a collaboration of hardline parties and
paramilitary groups which enforced a mass strike via road blocks and
worker intimidation. The secretive Glenanne Gang, which routinely
murdered Catholic civilians in the border regions, killed 33 in the
Irish Republic with car bombs in Dublin and Monaghan. The tale of the
loyalist paramilitaries is not complete without understanding their
relationship with the British state. Collusion between British
intelligence and loyalist gangs had long been suspected. In 2012, then
Prime Minister David Cameron admitted to “shocking levels of collusion”
in the UVF murder of Belfast lawyer Pat Finucane in 1989. However, to
this day the Finucane family and others have been routinely frustrated
in their quest to attain an inquiry into state collusion with loyalist
paramilitaries during the Troubles

Present
-------

This does not seek to be apologia for or romanticisation of republican
violence. It is simply an examination of the context in which the IRA
emerged; to show why so many on the British left empathised with the
Irish republican cause, to show the absurdity of UKIP’s calls for Muslim
interment and to show why the performative howls about Corbyn and the
IRA are so profoundly ignorant of the reality behind the conflict in
Northern Ireland.

It is of course vital to put the current IRA hysteria into a modern
context as well. In Northern Ireland there is now peace, although it is
an uneasy one. What has been demonstrated over the last number of years
by the British government is a wanton ignorance and lack of
consideration that has actively harmed stability in the North. Theresa
May’s calling of the general election came at a point where Northern
Irish parties were in negotiations aimed at reinstalling power-sharing
governance, following a collapse of the governing institutions amid a
financial scandal which implicated DUP leader Arlene Foster. May’s
political gambit has suspended these talks, leaving Northern Ireland
without a government for even longer, and plunging us into our seventh
election campaign since 2014.

The government’s flirtation with hard-right positions on the military
also has implications for Northern Ireland. May’s speech at the
Conservative Party Conference last year made clear her distaste for
“activist left wing human rights lawyers” who seek to prosecute British
soldiers for illegal activity in Iraq. This sentiment also extends to
Northern Ireland, where May is in lock-step with hardline unionists in
opposing the “victimisation” of British soldiers under investigation for
their role in civilian killings.

It seems that for Theresa May, the families of those killed by the army
in Derry and Ballymurphy. or those who were victims of collusion between
the British security state and loyalist paramilitaries, are not entitled
to justice - lest it disrupt ‘our brave boys’. This makes the media
exasperation at Jeremy Corbyn’s refusal to single out IRA violence all
the more revolting. Seeking to single out IRA violence as worse than
that of loyalists or the British state is nothing short of an erasure of
those victims, making clear that their lives and deaths do not matter.
At a time when the British government seeks to obstruct justice for
victims of the state, we are reminded of the narrow parameters of
discussion allowed on state violence and the British military.

Looming large in the background of all this is Brexit, and the profound
impact it is set to have on this island. Two decades after the Troubles,
Britain’s exit from the EU seems likely to result in a return to a
militarised border in Ireland. This is against the consent of the
majority of voters in Northern Ireland. Although both May and the Irish
government have made clear their opposition to this, there is no defined
strategy for how it can be avoided. This simply adds to the monumental
issues that Northern Ireland already faces. Northern Ireland still lags
behind the rest of the UK on key human rights issues. The hardline DUP
have exploited anti-sectarian veto powers to deny same-sex marriage
legislation despite its support amongst the majority of the population.
Neither of the main five political parties have particularly progressive
stances on abortion, which continues to be outlawed. Child poverty is at
24% and is particularly high in working-class North and West Belfast,
and Derry. Suicide has claimed more lives in peace than were lost to
violence in the Troubles. The proposed solutions to economic deprivation
are distinctly neoliberal – one of the few things the DUP and Sinn Fein
agree on is their desire to cut corporation tax.

Northern Ireland is a place with deep and sustained problems. It has
improved immeasurably since the violence of previous decades but as
these issues come to a head, the response from Westminster has done more
harm than good. It is, however, worth maintaining some perspective.
There is no immediate potential of a return to mass violence, as some
commentators seem to believe. However, at a time when compromise needs
to be made in order to restore power-sharing, the government has aligned
itself with hardline unionism in its dismissal of justice campaigns.
During the campaign, the Conservatives and the media cynically dragged
up the horrors of the past to try to clip the wings of Corbyn’s surge,
alienating many in Northern Ireland with their ignorance and
opportunism. As Sinn Fein continues its call for a unification poll, and
the threat of a Hard Brexit seems set to tear communities and economic
relations apart, more will begin the question the logic of the existence
of a border at all.
