The Stuplime Object of Ideology
===============================

by [Joe Kennedy](https://twitter.com/joekennedy81)

One of the most disconcerting things about the wake of the election
result has been the steady flow of people we have come to think of as
staunch critics of Corbyn and/or Corbynism making statements to the
effect that they are now prepared to acknowledge, at the very least, the
quality of his campaigning, and perhaps even the more general legitimacy
of his project. It’s not really for me to say whether or not those who
maintained belief in the viability of Corbynism should be willing to
offer general conciliation immediately, but I do think it’s worth
exploring precisely why there is, and will continue to be, a lingering
anxiety about the trustworthiness of centrist détente. Some of the notes
struck have been convincing – the oft-maligned Owen Smith’s, for one –
but others have allowed themselves the privilege of vapid-sounding
caveats. Here, it isn’t the fact of the caveat I want to call into
question, but a growing tradition of strategic vapidity visible in the
opposition to Corbyn.

Anger motivates, annoyance enervates
------------------------------------

In 2007, the American literary critic and cultural theorist Sianne Ngai
published a book called *Ugly Feelings*, which set out to explore
‘unprestigious negative affects such as irritation, envy and
disgust.’[^post-8-1] Such emotions, Ngai claims, are relatively
unexplored theoretically because – unlike anger, love, or terror – they
are inconclusive, building up a head of ‘minor’ feeling which has
nowhere to go and allows for no expression as action. Irritation, for
example, lacks the epic or tragic quality of anger: there’s a reason
Homer does not ‘sing of the annoyance of Achilles’. Disgust, too, lacks
an obvious catharsis. Because of their lack of outflow, such affects are
deprived of correlating political praxis and thus, paradoxically, offer
themselves promiscuously as political instruments insofar as they can be
used to stall counter-hegemonic organisation. Anger motivates, annoyance
enervates.

Of the affects Ngai covers, it is her discussion of stupidity that
demands the most attention. Stupidity, she demonstrates, can be thought
of as an unresolved and perhaps unresolvable experience that can be
understood if we ‘invoke the sublime – albeit negatively’.[^post-8-2]
Whereas the wavering between terror and beauty that constitutes the
Romantic sublime is ultimately synthesised by aesthetic work as a
coherent emotion, stupidity has an incalculability which contradicts any
redemptive ministrations. It holds its own inanity together with a
witnessing incomprehension, but does not mediate the two. Art can
mobilise this ‘stuplime’ – Ngai puts forward Gertrude Stein and Samuel
Beckett as examples here – but, in doing so, it only exacerbates the
problem of meaninglessness rather than taming it for cultured
delectation. In the political sphere, meanwhile, the stuplime represents
a hegemonic overloading in which capitalism renders itself opaque, its
hypercomplex set of relatively autonomous processes denying all attempts
at objective rationalisation.

[Ngai has
clarified](http://politicsslashletters.org/critiques-persistence/) her
argument usefully by stating that stuplimity should not be fetishized as
an excuse for political withdrawal, regardless of its capacity to stymie
action. To fail to counter it is to fall into accelerationism’s trap,
wildly surfing the what-is in the ludicrous trust that capitalism will
simply eat itself. Put more simply, it’s a species of hedonism: the
bad-faith consumption of all the trash late capitalism throws at us as
though there’s no space left for alternatives. Ideology no longer fools
us, as Slavoj Žižek – on this occasion, I think rightly – would have it,
but inculcates a knowing indolence when it comes to challenging
it.[^post-8-3] For Ngai, then, the first step to a counter-stuplime
would constitute being able to recognise stuplimity when one sees it,
and to isolate it as a tool of obfuscation.

The Age of Obfuscation
----------------------

This is very likely the age of obfuscation, and it’s shocking how
frequently nominally ‘left’ commentators are sucked into its traps.
Boris Johnson has been playing this game in the UK for well over a
decade now: making inflatedly idiotic remarks which invite engagement
with his putative personal crassness rather than his politics. Trump,
obviously, is this to the nth degree, and I doubt I’m the only one of us
who saw the ‘covfefe’ tweet and immediately winced at the thought of the
inevitable, pointless ‘excoriations’ and ‘eviscerations’ from Trevor
Noah and various talk-show hosts called Jon. Clintonite centrists and
their wan UK analogues make hay of Trump’s connections to Russia, but
the one thing they never discuss – largely because it challenges their
founding principle of reasonableness – is that excremental
Republicanism[^post-8-4] seems intellectually influenced by Putinism, a
political philosophy which balances its uses of hard power with a
widespread manipulation of Ngai’s ‘ugly feelings’.

Perhaps it’s risky to follow Adam Curtis in placing too much emphasis on
Vladislav Surkov, one of Putinism’s evanescent geniuses,[^post-8-5] but
it’s worth flirting with that level of paranoia to think about the
development of ‘non-linear warfare’. Allegedly influenced by
contemporary art theory,[^post-8-6] Surkov’s doctrine holds, or seems to
hold, that implausible deniability is, in an era of theoretically high,
internet-driven political transparency, better than plausible
deniability because it turns transparency against itself. If we see it,
this kinked belief system seems to announce, it can’t be happening, so,
make everything visible and your opponents simply have too much to
process: weaponise obviousness.[^post-8-7] Here, we’re not just talking
about the level of quite manifestly sending rocket launchers into
Ukraine, then indefensibly claiming otherwise, but of bringing dogs to
meetings with Angela Merkel (she allegedly doesn’t like them). It’s not
just that Merkel ends up scared of the dog, she also has to deal with
the question of whether the dog has been brought aggressively or
accidentally, of what is to be gained by an aggressive gesture, of quite
why it matters so little to Putin that he is perceived as purposely
insensitive and cruel. Non-linear warfare is radical obfuscation, and
you can see many aspects of it in Trump’s lunkheaded syntax and
hyperbolised ignorance. In reality, liberalism is blindsided by the
American president’s total disregard for the game of nicety.

Anti-Corbynism as Wind-up
-------------------------

Yet it isn’t, necessarily, only the political right who are mobilising
stupidity – in the sense of statements which are incalculably empty – in
the service of political ends. Where once the Blairite spin machine was
about slickness and ingratiation – and, of course, these are still the
values centrist politicians openly profess to admire, hence their
rhetoric of Axelrodian ‘electability’ – we now seem to have entered a
post-Mandelson, post-Campbell age, or else Mandelson, Campbell and their
acolytes have deliberately Surkovised themselves. Fooling or
‘convincing’ people are no longer reliable communicative approaches in
an age where literally everything is conceived of as spin. For several
years now, anti-Corbynism has taken the form of a chain-linked
deployment of bad faith remarks which seem designed to immobilise the
left precisely because of its lack of desire to convince. Whether it’s
from New Labour-affiliated commentators like Dan Hodges and Nick Cohen
(or Jonathan Freedland, or Suzanne Moore, and so on, ad infinitum) or
from the Blair – Brown PLP rump, the wind-up has replaced the sexed-up
truth claim as the hegemonic instrument of choice.

There are genuinely far, far too many examples to choose from, because
this dumb show, which typically throws in a salting of
authentocracy[^post-8-8] for good measure, has become a reflex for
anti-Corbynites. Let’s take one example, though: Blairite Labour MP Wes
Streeting’s 2016 claim that it was unconscionable bourgeois snobbery to
criticise McDonald’s, an assertion made in response to the prohibition
of the company from having an exhibition space at that year’s party
conference. Writing in the New Statesman, Streeting called the
anti-McDonald’s position ‘virtue-signalling of the worst
kind’[^post-8-9] which smacked of a kind of middle-class dilettantism.
Did Streeting really mean this? Almost certainly not, but the nakedness
and childishness of his opportunism was what I suspect we were really
supposed to observe. And how does one combat such an attitude? While the
anti-Corbynites were very quick to assert proprietorship over the use of
the word ‘troll’ as an insult, this was sophisticated and systematic
trolling. As the late [Mark Fisher pointed out in
2009](http://k-punk.abstractdynamics.org/archives/011172.html), trolling
is designed above all to waste time, to divert and consume energy that
could be directed towards constructive activity.

Trolling is stuplime: it both demands response and maintains, in its
banally contentless nature,[^post-8-10] a shit-eating unanswerability.
The former intensifies the latter, something particularly obvious if we
look at the use of Twitter by anti-Corbynites. A routine became clear
very quickly: make an intellectually indefensible remark, leave open the
possibility of debate, but either refuse to reply to replies or respond
with an extravagantly deliberate misunderstanding. After twelve hours or
so, claim that you’re being ‘targeted’ by ‘trolls’ who are invariably
also ‘Momentum thugs’, and retweet the sympathetic comments of your
political allies as a kind of second wave of attack. I suppose the
pop-psychological term for the approach is ‘passive-aggressive’.

Towards the election, Corbynism seemed most confident once it had
seemingly laid its own claim on the meme-y aspects of the stuplime. In
2016, quite a few of us were discussing the sheer exhaustion we felt at
being confronted with an opponent who swerved all debate while
eulogising the principle of rational discussion.[^post-8-11] We were
concerned about the consumption of energy by the species of performative
ridiculousness I’ve tried to outline here. Perhaps this explains 2017’s
backlash, the rhetoric of ‘slugs’ and ‘melts’, a stylised, memeable
puerility perhaps set up to suggest that there’s no longer any point in
attempting meaningful dialogue. Personally, I’m not entirely comfortable
with this turn: it seems short-termist and burns bridges. Yet its
existence, I think, is understandable if not entirely welcome, and
should perhaps remind us of the scale of the rift that has opened up,
and of the difficulty of attempting any simple closure when such a lack
of trust about the meaning, or non-meaning, of words exists.

[^post-8-1]: Description from Harvard University Press’ website -
    http://www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog.php?isbn=9780674024090.

[^post-8-2]: Sianne Ngai, *Ugly Feelings*. Cambridge, MA. Harvard
    University Press, 2007, p. 271.

[^post-8-3]: This is an endlessly recycled Žižekian theme, but is
    perhaps best expressed by the glosses on Peter Sloterdijk’s ideas
    about contemporary cynicism in *The Sublime Object of Ideology*.

[^post-8-4]: I owe the notion of ‘excremental’ Republicanism to Timothy
    Bewes’s keynote speech ‘Some Recent Experiments in American Fiction’
    at the Reading and its Objects conference at the University of
    Sussex on May 8th 2017.

[^post-8-5]: See, of course, Curtis’ 2016 BBC film HyperNormalisation.
    There are also a clutch of varyingly inflatory takes on the Surkov
    myth, such as this 2014 article by [Peter Pomerantsev in The
    Atlantic](https://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2014/11/hidden-author-putinism-russia-vladislav-surkov/382489/)

[^post-8-6]: Speculation regarding the extent to which this is a
    basically Westerne xaggeration of the political relevance and/ or
    efficacy of postmodernist aesthetics seems in some ways, again
    depending on how paranoid one feels, an outcome of non-linear
    warfare!

[^post-8-7]: This isn’t a stunningly new idea, but it’s one liberal
    culture seems in general resistant towards. See Jacques Lacan’s
    seventh seminar *On the Ethics of Psychoanalysis*, on the right-wing
    intellectual’s willingness to ‘admit he’s a knave’ because, well,
    how do you answer back against someone who openly confesses they’re
    morally bankrupt? Not on moral grounds, for certain.

[^post-8-8]: Maybe this term needs pragmatically defining here, although
    its nuances turn out to require a book-length treatment. Let’s say
    for now that ‘authentocracy’ is what happens when a (often centrist,
    but also conservative) politics gives up on immanently defensible
    truth-claims and insists on an assertion’s rightness on the basis of
    the (supposed) authenticity on the claim-maker. A vintage, and
    typically non-sequiturial, example: ‘I came from a council estate
    and left school with no GCSEs and built up a business, so I can say
    with certainty that Blair was right to prosecute the Iraq War’.
    Perhaps even more commonly, it projects a position onto someone
    allegedly more authentic than the speaker, i.e. ‘progressive’
    anti-Brexit journalists and MPs talking about the ‘legitimate
    concerns about immigration’ of people in Stoke, or Walsall, or
    Hartlepool. Authentocracy and stuplimity meet somewhere, arguably in
    their non-answerability.

[^post-8-9]: If you really want to read Streeting’s article again, it’s
    [here](http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/staggers/2016/04/labours-mcdonalds-ban-virtue-signalling-worst-kind).

[^post-8-10]: Trolling as Fisher identifies it is pure form, its method
    derived from academia’s devotion to quibbling pedantry. Its
    disagreements are not principled, but grounded in the formal
    possibility of disagreement.

[^post-8-11]: This piece is an expansion of ideas I first wrote about
    last year here:
    http://adrawingsympathy.blogspot.co.uk/2016/07/non-linear-borefare.html
