Notes on the Reshuffle
======================

by [oidptg](https://twitter.com/oidptg)

Earlier this week Corbyn [quietly
announced](http://press.labour.org.uk/post/161846788904/shadow-cabinet-appointments)
a reshuffle of his Shadow Cabinet. The changes, though limited, raise
some interesting questions about the policy direction of the party and
underline how his standing with the parliamentary party has changed.

While we should expect further changes at the more junior levels, what
is immediately evident is that Corbyn (rightly) resisted the calls from
the political press and some of their ideological bedfellows on the
right of the party for the reinstatement of so-called “big beasts” such
as Yvette Cooper and Chuka Umunna.

Their furious reaction to having been overlooked is outlined in
delicious detail in [the Mail
today](http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4614420/Labour-MP-mocks-idea-Jeremy-Corbyn-won.html).
That some of these individuals apparently feel that their disloyalty
towards Corbyn and their open contempt for party members — [as
documented by
NS](https://newsocialist.org.uk/a-vow-of-silence-a-chronicle-of/) —
should be rewarded with a seat at the table is risible. Mediocrity and
entitlement is a toxic combination. A period of reflection as they toil
in obscurity on the backbenches may serve them well. Two such “leading
lights”, Hilary Benn and Yvette Cooper, are likely but not certain to
retain their positions (and media platforms) as chair of the Brexit and
Home Affairs committees respectively however.

Those that have been elevated by Corbyn — Andrew Gwynne, Ian Lavery,
Dawn Butler etc — cannot be caricatured or dismissed by the media as
unwavering, staunch Corbynites, although a few more of those around the
Shadow Cabinet table would be welcome. What unites these names was their
conduct during the election just gone: they proudly took the message of
the manifesto to the country. This put them in stark contrast to many of
their colleagues in the PLP and evidently marked them for promotion.

But what might these appointments mean for the party and its platform?

Andrew Gwynne, Shadow Communities and Local Government Secretary
----------------------------------------------------------------

Andrew Gwynne, an MP who supported Ed Balls for the leadership in 2010,
Andy Burnham in 2015 and Owen Smith in 2016, is to the right of the man
he replaces in the role, Grahame Morris, who returns to the backbenches
after a period of illness. Gwynne is particularly close to Burnham
having coordinated his recent campaign for the Greater Manchester
mayoralty.

While he might not be said to exactly share Corbyn’s politics, Gwynne
was unquestionably one of the strongest media performers of the election
campaign. His robust, combative performances were typified by his widely
shared [badgering of a flustered Boris Johnson the night of the leaders’
Q&A](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eSPoOerQV7k).

Having served in the shadow Transport and Health teams previously, he
brings a good understanding of some of the policy areas such as social
care and public transport that intersect with the Communities and Local
Government brief. Under Miliband he sought to introduce a [private
member’s
bill](https://andrewgwynnemp.wordpress.com/2013/10/31/support-the-jobs-bill-urges-sponsor-andrew-gwynne/)
that would have required contractors winning public contracts to provide
apprenticeships and skills training. Such ideas could form part of a
broader vision for local government perhaps lacking from Corbynism (at
least in emphasis) thus far, building upon the successes of the [Preston
model](http://www.renewal.org.uk/articles/the-road-to-socialism-is-the-a59-the-preston-model)
and its notion of an “inclusive economy”.

Positively, given the brilliant campaign he just helped to oversee and
the likelihood of another election shortly, Gwynne retains the campaign
coordinator role alongside his new brief.

Ian Lavery, Party Chair
-----------------------

Lavery, a former President of the NUM, was introduced to many voters for
the first time in this election through his combative media
performances. As with Gwynne, his finest moment came [against Boris
Johnson](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kPPyBLC5ddM). Lavery takes over
the role from Tom Watson, who retains his position as Shadow Culture,
Media and Sport Secretary alongside his elected position as Deputy
Leader.

The role of Party Chair, established by Blair in 2001, is in some senses
a purely symbolic one. It does not confer upon Lavery any particular
institutional or political responsibilities above that of other Shadow
Cabinet colleagues. The Party Chair does not have a seat on the NEC for
example. The press release accompanying the reshuffle points to Lavery’s
role as being to “strengthen our campaigning and party organisation”.
This, alongside his retention of the election coordinator role alongside
Gwynne, suggests the Party Chair position has been given to him in
recognition of his recent organisational and media efforts.

Dawn Butler, Shadow Diverse Communities Minister
------------------------------------------------

Butler, the third black woman to become an MP and the the first ever
elected female African-Caribbean Government Minister, returns to the
role she held before resigning in February 2017 over the decision to
invoke a three-line whip on the vote to trigger Article 50. She returns
to the position in what has been described as the [“most diverse
Parliament
ever”](http://www.voice-online.co.uk/article/voters-elect-most-diverse-parliament-ever),
a fact largely driven by the election of new Labour MPs.

No such role exists in government, but as with the establishment of a
shadow mental health minister role (occupied by Luciana Berger until she
resigned last year in the wake of the Brexit vote), it was created to
accentuate the differences in priority and emphasis between Corbyn's
Labour and the Conservatives.

Her task will to be build upon the promise of the [Race and Faith
Manifesto](http://www.labour.org.uk/page/-/party-documents/Race%20%26%20Faith%20Manifesto%202017.pdf)
which placed a welcome emphasis on "unlocking potential" and "better
representation in public life", echoing the priorities laid out by
Butler herself in a [party
video](https://www.facebook.com/labourparty/videos/vb.25749647410/10153933057662411/?type=2&theater)
when she first took on the role last year.

Owen Smith, Shadow Northern Ireland Secretary
---------------------------------------------

Who?

Lesley Laird, Shadow Scottish Secretary
---------------------------------------

The lowest profile of the new appointees given that she had only just
first been elected to the Commons a few days prior.

Having supported Andy Burnham and Kezia Dugdale in the 2015 Labour
leadership elections, she is not particularly left-leaning. She comes to
Westminster having served on Fife Council and latterly as Economy &
Planning spokesperson and deputy leader.

She can’t be worse than the previous incumbent but one [Ian
Murray](https://twitter.com/IanMurrayMP/status/840604117806518274), a
man only who held the role in the first place because he was Labour’s
last remaining Scottish MP.

Some further disparate thoughts:
--------------------------------

-   While we on the left must of course be gracious and extend the hand
    to any MP that recants and pledges full fealty to the Corbyn
    project, part of me wishes Corbyn would test Angela Eagle’s election
    night “pledge to play any part my party should ask of me” by
    offering her the most derisory role possible. PPS to Owen Smith
    perhaps?

-   Andy Burnham, a man equal parts absurd (see his 2010 leadership
    platform for [“ASPIRATIONAL
    SOCIALISM”](https://issuu.com/andy4leader/docs/aspirationalsocialism))
    and appalling (see his [opening up of the NHS to private healthcare
    companies](http://www.conservativehome.com/leftwatch/2014/12/andy-burnham-has-shown-the-way-on-nhs-privatisation.html)),
    has roots that run deep within the PLP. His departure from
    Westminster to contest the Greater Manchester mayoralty has not
    changed this. Several of the new intake (Afzal Khan in Manchester
    Gorton; Jo Platt in his old seat Leigh) have ties to him and several
    of those now in the Shadow Cabinet (Andrew Gwynne, Debbie Abrahams,
    Nia Griffith, Ian Lavery, Christina Rees, Andy McDonald, Valerie
    Vaz, Keir Starmer) supported his candidacy for the leadership
    in 2015. We should ready ourselves for the unappealing prospect of
    hearing more from the little boy prince up the M6 should Labour’s
    polling dip.

-   It will be interesting to see who, if anyone, Corbyn picks as his
    PPS — a role unoccupied since Kate Osamor moved up to a full shadow
    ministerial position and Steve Rotheram moved on from the Commons.
    It would be positive to see one of the young new intake on the left
    brought into the fold.


