Corbyn's Emerging Class Coalition
=================================

by [Kyle Geraghty](https://twitter.com/theoryashistory)

The shock gains by Corbyn have gifted him a political, if not electoral,
victory. In light of this there has been a rush to try to understand how
this happened despite his long-term problems in the polls, and political
science’s incapacity to understand how left economics and an atypical
media strategy fits into the current political landscape.

Though a lot of pundits have tried to frame this as a gain made due to
an almost metaphysical opposition to the Tories, some political
scientists have recognised correctly that these gains were built on
something partially novel. This consists of a unique capacity for Corbyn
to increase youth turnout and maintain left-wing support in a way which
both counteracted the loss of the pro-Brexit portion of the culturally
working class to the Tories and added a surprising set of new voters
across several key seats.

This reflects the debate throughout Corbyn’s leadership, which has
focused on which components of the Labour vote he is losing: those with
lower education who voted for Brexit, the culturally defined C2DE
“working class”, traditional older Labour voters, and so on. However,
beyond a general sense that he is gaining the youth vote and a barrage
of abuse based on class signifiers accusing supporters of being richer
and more educated than historical Labour voters, a discussion of the
class coalition he may actually represent has been severely lacking and
replaced with a relatively vague focus on age.

In part this derives from a lack of debate on the changing political
economy after the crisis, which is still largely being treated as a
suspension of normal capitalism rather than part of capitalism’s
long-term evolution. Though not addressed in full here, what’s important
to identify here is a low-productivity Britain with a growth in high
skilled young workers, alongside decades of high wealth growth among
large sections of the population, all of whom have been affected
differently by the crisis and its aftermath.

In these circumstances, we should be expecting a realignment of class
alliances, not just a repeat of New Labour’s historical alliance of
poorer culturally working-class voters, and educated culturally
middle-class voters.

Currently, it’s difficult to ascertain if this did occur in the recent
election. The data we have for 2017 is still limited. We have the
election results and we have a breadth of increasingly outdated
geographical data mixing the 2011 census with labour surveys from 2016
which allow us to at least capture the “spirit” of a seat even if we so
far do not understand which actual voters moved to different parties.

Therefore, in this piece I will be first identifying what geographical
trends we can identify from our data on 2017 but also, more
fundamentally, looking back at data from earlier in Corbyn’s leadership
to see if we could identify a new class coalition emerging.

To do so I focus on economic location as the primary component of class,
as described in Marxist theory. This contrasts to the typical definition
used, which drawing on Weberian analysis, focuses on how specific life
attitudes are generated through the mediation of the skills and outcomes
of specific occupations with only a peripheral relationship to these
occupations place within capitalism as a whole. Focusing on economic
location allows a more direct examination of the circumstances people
find themselves in now, and in turn ties to what we have seen historic
class alliances being built upon, and the production of associated
cultural views. This is in contrast to the typical definition of class
which derives people’s views from specific life attitudes generated
through the mediation of skills and outcomes of specific occupations,
with only a peripheral relationship to these occupations’ place within
capitalism as a whole.

However, this can come with problems. The drive behind people’s voting
intentions often reflects their entire life path and their values, which
have been generated both in relation to their own lives and their social
status. Nevertheless, it prevents the highly problematic tendency for
‘working class voters’ to be associated with specific norms of certain
historical periods of capitalism and allows us to move beyond the
bizarre idea that the working class is somehow shrinking as
deindustrialisation sets in despite income and wealth inequalities
remaining high and stagnant for decades.

What happened in 2017?
----------------------

In this section I want to identify four key points from the geographical
data we have on 2017 which, though not a comprehensive picture,
highlights some interesting potential areas of economic location, and
how these interact with typical ideas about peoples voting intentions.
The geographical data is based on each constituency; and due to limited
data from Scotland, only includes seats in England and Wales.

Throughout I will be focusing on the swing of the vote from 2015 to 2017
to identify where additional voters may be coming from, and will be
colour coding each side by the winning Party in 2017 to highlight who is
winning in seats where these swings are occurring. Each graph has a fit
line, with the R2 identifying the degree of correlation between the two
variables.

Firstly, the Tories did gain strong swings in seats with a high
proportion of culturally working-class voters, represented by the
semi-routine and routine occupations: the traditional “C2D” working
class. In spite of this swing, they still didn’t win many seats with a
higher proportion of these occupations.

![](/Users/joe/Projects/nsbooks/what-sort-of-victory/data/graph1.PNG)

Furthermore, the Labour Party didn’t do well compared to 2015 in seats
with a higher proportion of culturally middle-class occupations
represented by lower professionals, “intermediate” occupations
(including many low-skill office roles), and higher supervisors, with
Tories still winning in many more middle class seats.

![](/Users/joe/Projects/nsbooks/what-sort-of-victory/data/graph2.PNG)

Secondly, a similar bifurcation exists in pay. The Tories did well
compared to 2015 in areas with relatively lower median annual incomes
despite failing to win many poorer seats. In turn no clear relationship
exists between swings towards Labour and annual pay despite their
continuing to win many poorer seats.

![](/Users/joe/Projects/nsbooks/what-sort-of-victory/data/graph3.PNG)

![](/Users/joe/Projects/nsbooks/what-sort-of-victory/data/graph4.PNG)

These two categories don’t do much to explain the Labour swing. Looking
at the largely well supported view that young people helped drive
Labour, we find clear evidence that they supported Labour’s swing, with
Labour having higher swings and winning many seats with a higher
percentage of 18-24s.

![](/Users/joe/Projects/nsbooks/what-sort-of-victory/data/graph5.PNG)

This isn’t the full story however, as although 18-24s were important,
this trend becomes stronger if we extend it to include 18-29s. The R2
correlation is higher and as such seems to represent the full width of
the recession generation, including those who reached the age of
majority during and not long before the crisis hit.

![](/Users/joe/Projects/nsbooks/what-sort-of-victory/data/graph6.PNG)

Drilling into this group deeper we also find that in contrast to the
narrative that this was only driven by students and the educated young
more generally, the role of the proportion of individuals with a degree
in a constituency is weaker than the role of the proportion of
households renting. This suggests a more directly economic cause.

![](/Users/joe/Projects/nsbooks/what-sort-of-victory/data/graph7.PNG)

![](/Users/joe/Projects/nsbooks/what-sort-of-victory/data/graph8.PNG)

Finally, the role of the EU referendum is remarkably different for
Labour and the Tories. Labour apparently had the capacity to maintain
relatively high swings across all types of seats, defending many of its
northern pro-Leave seats, with losses in strong pro-Leave seats matched
by gains in strong pro-Remain seats. By contrast, the Tories faced
significant disadvantages in strong-Remain seats and faced relatively
small gains in both slightly pro-Remain and weak pro-Leave seats.

![](/Users/joe/Projects/nsbooks/what-sort-of-victory/data/graph9.png)

The overall picture that develops from this analysis is that, in many
ways, each Party seems to have been fighting a different election.

The Tories appeared to believe the gains they could make in culturally
working class and low-income seats would allow them to triangulate
between their traditionally more middle class high income core vote and
a share of Labour’s vote; in reality only a relatively small portion of
the votes of the latter were lost. Labour was able to gain significant
shares of new young voters and maintain key parts of the working class
and low-income vote by focusing on left-wing policies.

Individual Voter Data, The Measures, and Initial Problems
---------------------------------------------------------

In the absence of individual voter data from the post-election period,
the rest of this article will focus on data from the tenth wave of the
British Election Studies Internet Panel. This was collected in late
2016, at a time when Corbyn was at a low point in the polls, after the
EU vote had affected support for Labour among both the lower educated
due to their support for Leave and sections of the highly educated who
were unhappy with their acquiescence to the referendum result.

To get a sense of economic location I will be looking at three measures:
housing tenure as a representative of wealth, household income as a
representative of an individual’s concrete available resources, and
education as a representative of skill.

These cross the traditional ABC measures of social class in which
education is largely the defining factor, due to its relationship with
skill and therefore occupation. It also regards income as secondary due
to old assumptions about the outcome of education, despite the growing
numbers of poorer highly educated workers, and leaves wealth entirely
out of the picture despite the rapidly growing generational gap.

The Changing Economic Location of Labour Voters from 2005 to 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------

The first comparison I want to make is between the three variables for
economic location for Labour and Conservative voters between 2005 and
2016. Though the percentages include all parties, I am only presenting
Labour and Conservative voters to provide a clear picture of the
specific support among each group, and to identify changing patterns:

![](/Users/joe/Projects/nsbooks/what-sort-of-victory/data/graph10.png)

2016 represented a major shift away from traditional voting patterns for
Labour among non-social tenants, while Conservative voting patterns had
remained remarkably stable. Specifically, while non-social tenants had
previously tended to each maintain relatively similar sized pro-Labour
contingents, by 2016 a clear division between owners, buyers, and
renters appeared. The contingent of renters in particular in 2016
supported Labour at levels closer to 2005 than 2010 or 2015.

![](/Users/joe/Projects/nsbooks/what-sort-of-victory/data/graph11.png)

Income patterns again saw the Conservative voting pattern remain
remarkably stable. In turn Labour’s share of each income quartile had
become bifurcated in a way which put Labour in a disadvantageous
position: typically with the 1st quartile converging with the 2nd in
their support for Labour, and the 3rd converging with the 4th in higher
support for the Conservatives. Alongside consistent Conservative voting
patterns, this meant Labour lost all but the 1st income quartile.

![](/Users/joe/Projects/nsbooks/what-sort-of-victory/data/graph12.png)

Finally, the patterns of support divided by education had remained
relatively stable even as the gaps between each group had slowly
converged. The large differences for Labour got closer from 2005,
resulting in a rapid loss of support among those with no education
despite no strong gains for Conservatives among this group.

Though throughout these graphs we can also see a generalised loss of
Labour support in 2016, the changing patterns of support is significant
in identifying: \* The changing role of wealth with lack of access to
this (represented here as rental tenants) as the only constituency in
which Labour was gaining. \* The bifurcation of support by income, with
Labour retaining a smaller but still significant section of the poorer
voters while richer voters become increasingly anti-Labour. \* The
diminishment of educational differences as a predictor of vote share
despite those with no education not clearly moving to the Conservatives
either.

To a substantial extent this matches some of the initial assumptions
made at the start of this piece. The decreased significance of education
would be representative of a loss among low skilled workers; however the
increasing bifurcation of education also shows that this didn’t
represent a wholesale abandonment of Labour by the working class. While
certainly some low skilled and poor workers are moving away from Labour,
particularly in the 1st income quartile, a division by income remains
strong and is increasingly supplemented by a division over wealth.

Uneven Losses from 2015 or a New Coalition of Voters?
-----------------------------------------------------

The next three graphs will present information on the changing position
of 2015 voters both to and from Labour in their 2016 voting intention,
to indicate if this is actually a developing class interest or if it
simply represents an uneven set of losses among those who voted for
Labour in the past. Throughout it will utilise “other” rather than the
Conservatives due to the limitations of presenting data on all major
parties in an easy to read fashion, though in doing so it may disguise
the various reasons people move away from Labour:

![](/Users/joe/Projects/nsbooks/what-sort-of-victory/data/graph13.png)

When the population is divided up by housing tenure, the movement
between 2015 and 2016 follows the new emerging pattern of increased
loyalty among those who appear to have low wealth. Importantly, the
increase in the Labour voting intention among renters uniquely reflects
the relatively high movement of non-voters and voters for other parties
to Labour as well. Furthermore, although Labour had lost significantly
among owner-occupiers and mortgage holders, a significant portion of
this group were still unsure of how they would vote in 2016 rather than
moving to other parties.

![](/Users/joe/Projects/nsbooks/what-sort-of-victory/data/graph14.png)

In contrast to housing tenure, the pattern across income groups is
remarkably stable. In particular, loyalty across income groups to the
Party remained remarkably similar to the patterns in 2015 with the
emerging convergence between the 2nd and 1st income quartile occurring
due to the higher movement of 1st quartile voters into don’t know. In
turn, the emerging bifurcation between the first two income quartile and
second two is driven by the low number of voters in the richer income
quartiles moving to Labour from other parties or abstention.

![](/Users/joe/Projects/nsbooks/what-sort-of-victory/data/graph15.png)

While above we saw a convergence of Labour’s support within each
education group, the way this is constructed is slightly different
across each group. Though only just, the largest share of movement to
other parties occurs among those with university level and no education.
Loyalty to Labour is highest among those in the low education
categories, with those who are educated to high school level becoming
stronger supporters than those with no education.

This secondary analysis partially confirms that the changing economic
location of Labour voters is down to the emergence of new voters. This
is especially relevant to the changing patterns around wealth, the
increased bifurcation between population as divided by income, and also
explains university-educated voters moving closer to those with lower
levels of education. However, patterns of Party loyalty for existing
voters were relatively similar to previous elections, with the major
exception of those with the lowest levels of education who had moved
substantially away from Labour.

Conclusions
-----------

Though I believe that this individual data does support the idea that
Labour’s support base is changing, it remains unclear if this is
providing it with the space for expansive future growth. In the
individual data here, collected before the election, the sole category
in which Labour had gained more voters from other parties than it has
lost is renters. However, in the 2016 data there are a high number of
don’t knows in numerous categories which Labour has lost; given YouGov
data showed that Labour won in all non-retired categories in the
election, this suggests that many of these people returned. It’s not
currently clear what this means when so many had moved away from Labour
before the election.

The geographical data indicates that while culturally working-class
voters are becoming less important to Labour, it is not necessarily the
case that Labour is losing the support of the “actual” working class as
defined by economic location. Indeed, it increasingly seems capable of
gaining lower income highly educated workers from other parties, most
particularly among those with low wealth. This seems to be the
foundation of a new coalition whose concerns would not easily be
answered by a more centrist approach, as Ed Miliband demonstrated only
two years ago.

Though this is only provisional until individual data for the 2017
election is released, it does suggest that the class coalition
underpinning the Labour Party is beginning to change. Increasingly the
Labour Party seems to be gaining support not from those who were “left
behind” by globalisation—or at least British capitalism’s path of
development from the 1970s until 2008—but those who were supposed to
gain from globalisation but didn’t due to the crisis and its aftermath.

It is also worth noting that in my analysis of individual data I have
not addressed an obvious confounding variable which may explain much of
this variation; age. Young people are heavily associated with renting in
the post-crisis era, make up a significant section of 1st and 2nd income
quartile (as do pensioners), and furthermore may explain the movement of
university educated individuals from other parties to Labour. However,
this does assume that the traditional cohort effect of voters getting
more conservative as they get older still holds, which may well not be
the case anymore. The possibility that today’s young people will not
necessarily become more Conservative as they age is rooted in changes in
British capitalism, specifically increased prices of assets and the
transformed function of assets that may exclude large numbers of today’s
young people from the means by which their parents became wealthier as
they aged.

Consequently, although we know that age has played a complex role in
supporting Labour’s gains recently, the individual data tries to
identify the economic location shared by individuals across age groups.
Therefore excluding it does not challenge my argument that Labour has
only lost the support of a specific section of the working class.

Instead it has allowed us to better identify what has occurred with the
uneven effect of pay and working class support for Labour in 2017. The
losses primarily seem to have occurred within a section of the C2DE
social grades whose position in that occupation-based classification is
a derivative of their education. This has resulted in net losses among
those with no education and uneven losses in the 1st income quartile.

By identifying that even at a low point in polling in 2016 Labour
maintained support in some key economic locations in the individual
data, and gained among those with low wealth, we can begin to explain
why focusing on economic location may be worthwhile as we move into an
era in which class is no longer clearly defined by differences between
occupations.
