A Vow of Silence? A Chronicle of Internal Attempts to Sabotage the Labour Election Campaign
===========================================================================================

Forgive, Don’t Forget
---------------------

Speaking on the BBC’s election night special, both Yvette Cooper and
Jack Straw claimed that the Labour Party had been united behind Jeremy
Corbyn during the election campaign. This is a lie. It is a lie
motivated by the sudden, unexpected reality that the election result
further secured Corbyn’s position. The only questions about this lie are
whether it matters, and whether we should forget, for the sake of unity,
the actual behaviour of senior Labour party figures during our campaign.
We believe that it does, and we cannot and should not.

Throughout the election campaign, *New Socialist* kept a record of these
irresponsible criticisms, and what we argue amounted to attempts at
sabotage of the Labour Party’s election campaign. This criticism and
attempted sabotage came from what we would describe as a party within a
party, composed of elements of the Labour Party establishment.

In the wake of Labour’s fine result and the positive atmosphere in
response to this, we considered whether to publish our detailed account
and our analysis of this: ultimately, we decided that publishing
remained worthwhile. The examples of behaviour referenced here are only
a small sample of what we collected. We publish this not in order to
single out individuals for blame, despite our conviction that a Labour
government may well now be in place were it not for what we document
here. While we welcome those who admit they were wrong about Corbyn and
the prospects for a left-driven manifesto and election campaign, we
publish this in order to argue that the events of the election campaign
show all the more that it is necessary to implement widespread
democratic reform of the Party, so as to ensure that those people who
should be instruments of our movement, whether MPs or party bureaucrats,
are made accountable to this movement.

While we would hope not to require use of the tools created by the
democratisation we demand, we believe that these tools are necessary to
ensure that elements within the Party do not act independently of, and
instead respect, the expressed will of the Party membership. Indeed,
when writing of mandatory reselection in the 1980s, Hilary Wainwright
notes that its actual use was rare, and that the rules actually,
“improved the relation between CLPs and their MPs."[^post-14-1]

A Party Within a Party
----------------------

The result on June 8th represented substantial progress both for
Corbynism and Labour itself, as well as a total vindication of both the
leadership and the party base who have doggedly, often in the face of
widespread contempt from both the media and PLP, struggled in support of
Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership and what it represents. Led by Corbyn, with
significant support from most of the shadow cabinet and some MPs,
Labour’s campaign was remarkably successful. The manifesto offered a
serious programme for beginning to transform the UK and, thanks to its
ability to relate to the needs of ordinary people across the country –
significantly, across the Brexit/Remain divide – it brought many people
into an enthusiastic engagement with electoral politics for the first
time. Across the country, grassroots members both old and new, and even
some non-members, went out to campaign for a Labour victory. Not all of
these were people who voted for Jeremy Corbyn in either leadership
election, but nevertheless they struggled for a Labour government.

Very public disunity has been a constant under Corbyn’s leadership
despite the claim, often repeated by a servile and incurious press, that
the PLP had taken a “vow of silence” to allow Corbyn to fail on his own
accord. That this [disunity notably discouraged people from voting
Labour](http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/jeremy-corbyn-turning-off-labour-voters-in-slough-huffpost-uk-edelman-focus-group-finds_uk_5904443ce4b05c39767fcab0)
was a claim tweeted out, gloatingly and disgustingly, by a number of
Labour MPs. What is worse, many MPs were incapable of keeping quiet even
once the election was called and this self-indulgent indiscipline –
while tens of thousands of activists were giving up their free time to
help get a Labour government elected and secure sitting MPs’ jobs – is
our focus here. The popularity of Labour’s programme, coupled with the
strong campaign and Corbyn’s obvious attractiveness as a potential Prime
Minister when given fair media coverage and considerable unmediated
exposure, could have won us the election. Unfortunately, the actions of
a narrow set of people made this impossible. It is notable how many
candidates from other parties covered their leaflets with quotes from
Labour MPs attacking Corbyn, clearly feeling that signal-boosting these
ostentatious displays of disunity would boost their electoral chances.

What we see here are the actions of a party within a party, comprising
large parts of the PLP, many of the more senior bureaucrats at Labour HQ
in Southside, senior figures in the Scottish and Welsh Parties, a large
number of Labour councillors, and organisations including Progress and
Labour First. This party within a party is smoothly integrated and (at
least where convenient) ideologically coherent, though not homogenous.
There are, most notably, meaningful differences between Progress’s ever
more ludicrous efforts to reanimate Blairism, and the old-fashioned,
nostalgic mode of class politics of Labour First. What is more, this
grouping includes figures who are commonly identified with the “soft
left”. What, ultimately, provides the basis for its coherence is
primarily, and most immediately, its animus for any transformative idea
of politics, and also its bureaucratism and view of Party members as
essentially irresponsible and good for nothing but door-knocking.

Since Corbyn was elected party leader, their desire, even if it required
a heavy election defeat, was for party members to be taught a lesson and
to be forced into a return to placidity - abandoning real politics for
minor disagreements between themselves over how benign a technocratic
offer to make to the public and quite how far to go to indulge (that is
produce, reproduce and intensify) “legitimate concerns” regarding
immigration. What this will mean, however, is a situation where, “the
bureaucracy is the most dangerously hidebound and conservative force; if
it ends up by constituting a compact body, which stands on its own and
feels itself independent of the mass of members, the party ends up
become anachronistic and at moments of crisis it is voided of all social
content and left as though suspended in mid-air”.[^post-14-2] It is
important to note too that this faction of the party is smoothly
integrated -- through a mixture of shared class interests, mutually
beneficial leaks and social ties -- with the gossip peddlers who
masquerade as political journalists in the Westminster lobby. This
provides a basis for unaccountable, often anonymous leaks and slurs to
be made, which cumulatively harmed the party’s prospects considerably.

What we document here demonstrates how far this party within a party
will go in order to prevent Labour winning on a left programme.
Moreover, even if the Party standing on such a platform was able to gain
a majority, such an intransigent faction would prove a major impediment
to the exercise of real power, and to that programme’s implementation.
This faction will, we argue, always aim to constitute itself as a
compact body, autonomous from this membership. If we want to win an
election and to rule on the basis of a left programme, it is imperative
that MPs, the bureaucracy at HQ, the Scottish and Welsh parties, and
Labour councillors be brought fully under the control of the membership,
and that those who actively seek to hinder our chances in elections be
removed from positions that enable them to do so.

A Note on internal Opposition and Disloyalty
--------------------------------------------

Some will argue that Corbyn, McDonnell and Abbott have been serial
rebels, and that the behaviour of the PLP-level party within a party
towards them is merely the same. However, Corbyn, McDonnell and Abbott’s
opposition was serious and rooted in moral principle. It is not just
that they were right (although they were) but that their opposition was
serious – there is a difference between opposing the Iraq War,
foundation hospitals and tuition fees and making “who ate all the pies?”
jokes about a member of the shadow cabinet (Ian Austin and Neil Coyle,
it appears the tweets have been deleted). Moreover, their opposition on
the majority of substantive issues represented the expression of the
will of the Party’s membership, in opposition to this (then-more
powerful) faction’s attempts to stymie it. We believe that there are
possible disagreements on points of principle and strategy that could be
discussed seriously and in ways that would allow learning and becoming a
more successful Party. What we document here is not such useful,
comradely disagreement, indeed even when the most serious points of
principle are at stake, but their integration into what Joe Kennedy has
called [“non-linear
borefare”](http://adrawingsympathy.blogspot.nl/2016/07/non-linear-borefare.html),
an apparatus of constant triviality, where “rhetorics not of deceit but
of cumulative irritation” means such discussion is debased and
trivialised.

Immediately after the Election was Called
-----------------------------------------

In the immediate wake of the election being called, [John
Woodcock](https://www.facebook.com/John-Woodcock-MP-253928198013563/),
produced a video, promising were he elected and Labour won a majority he
would not back Corbyn becoming Prime Minister. While ordinary party
members rightly reacted with bafflement and fury to such a promise of
material sabotage of the Party should it be elected to government, it
was reported that the Labour NEC specifically endorsed Woodcock’s
candidacy, with [Tom Watson and Kezia
Dugdale](https://twitter.com/jessicaelgot/status/859815999520092161)
phoning in to the meeting especially to do so. Woodcock continued this
line throughout the campaign, and similar but less clear positions were
taken up by a number of candidates including [Wes
Streeting](https://www.politicshome.com/news/uk/political-parties/labour-party/jeremy-corbyn/news/85316/labour-mp-wes-streeting-jeremy)
and [Neil
Coyle](http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4436370/We-stand-better-chance-without-Corbyn-leader-says-MP.html),
both of whom argued that Corbyn was a dangerous liability.

“Legitimate Concerns”
---------------------

A further theme throughout the campaign, particularly at its infancy,
and perhaps the one that has been most comprehensively refuted by the
result, was the Blue Labour-type claim that Corbyn was out of touch with
ordinary working class voters on immigration. This argument was notably
made by [Michael
Dugher](http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/june2017/2017/04/michael-dugher-interview-remarkable-achievement-jeremy-corbyn-be-doing-so)
in a fawning, valedictory interview with the lesser NS, and also
proceeded through various
[\#LabourDoorstep](https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/apr/26/its-going-to-be-a-bloodbath-tories-target-high-profile-labour-seats)
anecdotes and leaks from [“senior Party
sources”](https://twitter.com/HichamYezza/status/856460702252400641)
[particularly](http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/labours-general-election-script-doorstep-message-for-mps-spending-pledges-privileged-few_uk_58ff2792e4b0b6f6014a88d9?9oz)
in the [North](http://) and Midlands. The sorry apotheosis of this
tendency was Stephen Kinnock’s laying of the groundwork for a
post-election leadership bid with a slogan borrowed - doubtless
unknowingly, but nevertheless alarmingly - from [Vichy
France](https://twitter.com/EdmundGriffiths/status/860427448089018368).

NATO Nia
--------

Whilst most of the shadow cabinet, even those who had had disagreements
with the leadership, behaved decently or better during the campaign, one
exception was Nia Griffith, who had been appointed Shadow Defence
Secretary following her [apparent active
opposition](http://www.walesonline.co.uk/news/politics/stop-trident-campaign-launched-wales-10281742)
to nuclear weapons. Griffith, in a clearly unhelpful way, undermined
Corbyn by [publicly stating her enthusiasm not only for their retention
but for their
use](https://twitter.com/Jack_Blanchard_/status/856465509503692800). It
was unsurprising, therefore, to see [*The Guardian*
speculate](https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jun/09/corbyn-team-at-labour-hq-stunned-by-exit-polls-on-election-night)
shortly after the election that her removal from her shadow cabinet post
could be imminent.

The Scottish and Welsh Labour Parties
-------------------------------------

Other parts of the party aiming for autonomy from the leadership and the
membership, to better integrate itself into the dominant social
organisation, were the Scottish and Welsh Labour Parties. It is standard
practice for Scottish and Welsh Labour to publish their own manifestos,
partly in recognition of the different political contexts and varying
degrees of devolved powers in each nation. However, what was
disappointing is to see was the consistent emphasis of their difference
from the [Corbyn-led
Party](https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/apr/24/wales-poll-suggests-labour-could-lose-century-long-dominance)
and programme from the Welsh Labour leadership. Indeed, one [key Plaid
Cymru](https://twitter.com/Plaid_Cymru/status/872074899187261440) attack
has been “There are 3 different Labour manifestos each promising
different things”. Moreover, [Kezia
Dugdale](http://www.express.co.uk/news/uk/807559/Kezia-Dugdale-Nicola-Sturgeon-SNP-Scottish-independence-poll-Ruth-Davidson)
actually advocated tactical voting for the Tories in some Scottish
seats.

Labour HQ
---------

The attempts to restrict as much power as possible to an autonomous
bureaucracy, using the membership only for door-knocking, unsurprisingly
extended to senior party staff at their Southside HQ. The disruptive
role of Southside has already been detailed by Corbyn’s former spokesman
[Matt
Zarb-Cousin](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2017/04/jeremy-corbyn-theresa-may-media-general-election-labour),
and continued into the campaign, with unnamed members of party staff
threatening [a
strike](https://twitter.com/maxshanly/status/857512915078873088) if
Corbyn stayed on as leader post-election. It’s worth addressing the
function of this, the strike threat was not only a threat to
inconvenience practically but, through the chummy integration with the
press, to generate a ludicrous story about Corbyn being anti-worker. We
are also aware of a number of cases where inept behaviour from HQ and
absurd allocation of resources seriously [damaged vital campaigns and
organisation](http://labourpartymarxists.org.uk/sheffield-hallam-a-parallel-campaign-to-defeat-nick-clegg/):
in many such cases it was only the independent efforts of Momentum
activists that rescued the situation. Such a situation further bolsters
the demand that the General Secretary of the Labour Party be elected by
the membership as part of bringing the party bureaucracy under
democratic control, and New Socialist wholeheartedly endorses such a
demand.

Progress
--------

The joint Labour First/Progress ‘3 Seats Challenge’ road trip series
studiously avoided directing activists to seats held by left and
Corbyn-supporting MPs. Most egregiously, the Wales and the North West
leg took in Progress Chair Alison McGovern’s Wirral South (majority
4,559), whilst avoiding neighbouring Wirral West held by Corbyn
supporter Margaret Greenwood (majority of just 416). Questions also need
to be asked here about the role of regional offices, [in this case
North-West regional
office](https://twitter.com/roryhughes10/status/873857036404043776),
whose priorities often smoothly aligned with those of Progress in
allocating campaign resources, including in the case of these two Wirral
seats.

This is in stark contrast to the efforts of Momentum’s “rabble” during
the campaign. Their [My Nearest Marginal
tool](https://mynearestmarginal.com/), which despite receiving criticism
for an initially partial launch, directed users to all marginal
constituencies regardless of the politics of the Labour candidate. More
to the point, Momentum organised a number of campaign visits to seats
with moderate candidates and even some where the candidate has been
openly hostile to Corbyn. The Croydon Central candidate Sarah Jones (a
Liz Kendall supporter in 2015)
[told](http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/elections/2017/06/jeremy-corbyn-man-can-momentum-help-labour-take-croydon-central)
the lesser NS that “absolutely tonnes” of Momentum volunteers had
contributed to her campaign.

Progress’s director Richard Angell, meanwhile, engaged in very public
misrepresentation of and hostility towards party policy throughout the
campaign -- misrepresentation and hostility that clearly could only harm
the electoral chances of the Party. Early in the campaign, Angell’s
bizarre insistence that less NHS care would be provided as a result of
abolishing hospital car parking charges (and his attendant repeated
incantation of [“CARE NOT CAR
PARKS”](https://twitter.com/search?f=tweets&q=from%3Arichardangell%20care%20not%20car%20parks&src=typd)),
represented unhelpful opposition to a policy that was feasible, clear,
and likely to be popular with broad swathes of the electorate. Five days
before election day, Angell took to twitter to denounce the manifesto as
“more fantasy and less responsibility/affordability” (sic) than that of
the Party in 2015. The low point of Progress’ campaign of carping and
undermining, however, was possibly Angell’s denunciation of Corbyn’s
post Manchester attack speech, [published just
minutes](http://www.progressonline.org.uk/2017/05/26/the-last-word-no-excuses-for-terrorism/)
before a [poll demonstrating significant public support for Corbyn’s
position](https://twitter.com/adampayne26/status/868097020829065216) was
released.

This open campaign of hostility which, assuming anyone outside
Progress’s bubble of SpAds still even bothers listening to this rump
Blairite holdout, could only harm the Party at an election that was a
matter of days away. We believe that the time to take seriously the
proscription of Progress is long overdue, and that the evidence required
to support such a proposal is now considerable.

Diane Abbott
------------

A theme throughout the election was attacks on Diane Abbott. Whilst a
feature of the most disgusting parts of the gutter press and Tory attack
ads, the environment in which these attacks could take place was
nourished by reprehensible behaviour from Labour MPs, behaviour made all
the more reprehensible by the fact that such people could reasonably be
hoped to behave in a spirit of solidarity, decency and respect that
would not be expected of more gutter elements.

MPs such as [Jim
Fitzpatrick](https://twitter.com/FitzMP/status/860771461014978560), as
well as [Labour
insiders](https://twitter.com/PolhomeEditor/status/859341219717144576),
gloated about Abbott’s rather minor TV interview mistakes. In a chummy
“Blind Date” with Tory John Whittingdale, [Jess
Phillips](https://twitter.com/VictoriaLIVE/status/870557664912089089)
further mocked such errors. Most despicably of all, one MP – sharply
demonstrating the integration of a certain laddish, white male section
of the PLP with their friends in the media – texted [Tim “Shippers”
Shipman](https://twitter.com/ShippersUnbound/status/868748882305482752),
the repulsive line "Making Diane Abbott Home Secretary would be like
making Jimmy Savile the children's commissioner".

It is important to note the function of this abuse, and
[Abbott](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/feb/14/racism-misogyny-politics-online-abuse-minorities)
herself has written significantly on it. Her words are worth quoting at
length:

> I went into politics to create space for women and other groups who
> have historically been treated unfairly. Once, the pushback was
> against the actual arguments for equality and social justice. Now the
> pushback is the politics of personal destruction. This is doubly
> effective for opponents of social progress. Not only does it tend to
> marginalise the female “offender”, but other women look at how those
> of us in the public space are treated and think twice about speaking
> up publicly, let alone getting involved in political activity.

The gloating and “banter” by people ten thousand times less significant
that Diane Abbott, who will be quite rightly forgotten the moment they
step down, is not innocent. The abuse of such a trailblazer, whose
presence and determination have vastly improved Britain, is functional:
its function is to exclude from public life women of colour, and
particularly women of colour who challenge oppression as much as Diane
Abbott so proudly has throughout her political career.

Local Campaigns: Defeatist Talk
-------------------------------

The omission of Corbyn from campaign literature is perhaps unsurprising
if frustrating. What is more disappointing is the absence of incredibly
popular manifesto commitments from moderate candidates’ campaigns.

Some candidates, including Ben Bradshaw and [Wes
Streeting](http://www.standard.co.uk/news/politics/moderate-wes-streeting-is-backed-by-gandalf-and-hopes-to-work-his-magic-against-conservative-foe-a3551971.html),
sprinkled their campaign literature with the word “independent”,
distanced themselves entirely from Corbyn, and even offering up a meagre
alternative in the form of a “[personal
manifesto](http://www.devonlive.com/a-letter-from-ben-bradshaw-a-vote-for-me-will-not-affect-who-governs-nationally/story-30295011-detail/story.html)”
instead of associating themselves with Labour’s official (and very
popular) policies.

Others such as [Vernon
Coaker](https://www.facebook.com/VernonCoaker/photos/a.568452673276724.1073741828.546387805483211/1180535928735059/?type=3&theater)
went as far as to shun Labour colours for their campaign literature,
posters and garden signs.

It is also worth adding that many members of the PLP made strong attacks
on Theresa May and the Conservatives without ever positively advocating
for Labour’s programme (the most notable of these figures was Yvette
Cooper, see below), particularly while emphasising, as with Bradshaw,
the dangers of a landslide Tory majority.

This strategy is a rather deliberate one - in emphasising their
independence and personal achievements any victory can be attributed to
those factors and those factors alone. In de-emphasising the role of
Corbyn and his manifesto, should they lose they can then point to its
deleterious effect upon their ‘personal’ vote. This strategy also served
to repeat the anti-Corbyn arguments about the need for a “strong
opposition”, attempting to limit politics to a frame that was defensive
and purely Westminster focused, which would cut the project from its
great strength - its ability to generate new values and link to popular
needs and struggles.

Defeatist talk, and separating from Corbyn continued right up to the
end, including from Streeting, Peter Kyle and Neil Coyle in this long,
remarkably tedious and hilariously inaccurate “long-read” from [Jason
Cowley](http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/uk/2017/06/labour-reckoning).

Split Talk and the French Election
----------------------------------

The French election, coming at the time when Labour were beginning to
gather momentum in the polls, produced a whole set of odd fantasies, and
bizarre statements. Most of these involved talk of a formal split of the
party, but perhaps most reprehensible was [Pat
Glass’s](https://twitter.com/PatMGlass/status/861300193052041217) odd
argument that Marine Le Pen and Corbyn were essentially identical. More
typical, and widely leaked to the political journalists whose world is
smoothly integrated with that of the party within a party, were various
fantasies about a new centrist party, led by a British Macron. Such
reports claimed that as many as [100
MPs](https://twitter.com/Telegraph/status/862045261325008900) including
[Dan Jarvis](https://t.co/pkAamXeX6L) wished to form a breakaway Party
should Corbyn remain leader after the election. A more developed version
of a split plan was outlined by [Frank
Field](http://www.politico.eu/article/peoples-labour-jeremy-corbyn-loses-general-election-2017/amp/).

Manifesto
---------

As with the claim that the PLP was united during the campaign, there has
been considerable revisionism from many around the manifesto. Now it has
been proved to be a popular, even inspiring document, many wish to
retrocast themselves as having always supported it. This is, of course,
a lie. In sabotage around the manifesto, the story begins with its [leak
from
HQ](http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2017/05/10/exclusive-jeremy-corbyns-left-wing-labour-manifesto-leaked/),
further showing how far the party bureaucracy were prepared to go to
sabotage the campaign. In the wake of its leak, a number of MPs,
attacked the manifesto. [Frank Field described it as “childish”, Ben
Bradshaw also distanced
himself](http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2017/05/11/labour-mps-reject-jeremy-corbyns-manifesto-theresa-may-warns/),
other MPs attacked the manifesto’s lack of attacks on migrants, one
anonymous MP described it as reading like [“a 10-year old’s letter to
Santa
Claus”](http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2017/05/11/labour-mps-reject-jeremy-corbyns-manifesto-theresa-may-warns/)
and a further anonymous MP claimed it paid too much attention to the
[“feckless
poor”](http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/politics/labour-manifesto-leaked-jeremy-corbyn-10396298).

On the day the manifesto was launched, our research into the PLP’s
social media activity shows that only roughly a quarter of those who
tweeted that day even acknowledged the manifesto. Moreover, many of
those who praised it did so only to highlight more conventional
individual policies – often good ones nonetheless, such as ending burial
fees for children – rather than the transformative nature of the the
manifesto as a whole. On the day of the manifesto launch, MPs did have
time, however, to tweet criticism of other parties’ manifestos without
mentioning Labour ([Christina
Rees](http://www.christinarees.org/press-release-16th-may/)), retweet a
crudely made sign praising his experience ([Alan
Whitehead](https://twitter.com/MJCreighton/status/864404000078254080)),
or tweet various pictures of themselves with dogs ([Kevan
Jones](https://twitter.com/Kevan4NDurham/status/864502117477777408)).

Yvette Cooper’s Leadership Campaign
-----------------------------------

Throughout the election campaign, if one had only studied the twitter
accounts of the PLP, it would have appeared that Labour were being led
by Yvette Cooper, and that the main plank of Labour’s policy programme
was to increase sentences for those convicted of attacking police
officers. The point here is not just that this is a bad policy, but that
it is a trivial one if one is thinking about the issues the country
faces, and the issues that were likely to be salient with the lived
experience of voters. On the day of the manifesto launch, substantially
more MPs (including [Ian
Austin](https://twitter.com/IanAustinMP/status/864504236800913408) and
[Jack
Dromey](https://twitter.com/JackDromeyMP/status/864469380826107904))
tweeted praise for Cooper. All of this distancing from Corbyn and
treating Cooper as if she were already Labour leader was clearly in
preparation for an attempt to install Cooper by the PLP, and attempting
to break entirely from the democratic control of the people whose hard
work secured their seats.

On election night itself, it was notable that the likes of Charles
Clarke, Alan Johnson, and Jack Straw were placed and timed to appear
with Grid-like efficiency across TV studios -- presumably to call for
such a change in the immediate aftermath of the exit poll's announcement
and of declarations in bellwether seats.

Manchester
----------

In the wake of the Manchester terrorist attacks, many leading Labour
figures attacked Corbyn for being an apologist for terrorism. In some
instances, bleakly comically, for example with [Andy
Burnham](http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/andy-burnham-manchester-mayor-causes-of-terrorism-jeremy-corbyn-speech-a7758551.html),
the attack involved a misrepresentation of Corbyn’s position, followed
by stating a rather ineptly articulated version of a similar position to
Corbyn’s as his own. Neil Coyle, Wes Streeting, Mike Gapes offered
various pieces of snide condemnation too, as did various other anonymous
MPs and candidates.

Conclusions: Where Now?
-----------------------

At this point party unity is necessary, and this requires a certain
amount, and certain type, of forgiveness from the left. However, this
party unity, while unquestionably necessary, cannot be on the typical
terms, which entails the left who, as this campaign has further proved
care more about the good of the Party than the right, at least in the
PLP, being prepared to compromise first.

Only if it can be satisfactorily demonstrated that compromise on the
part of the Party’s right is genuine and permanent should it be
forgiven. We are concerned that, despite the odd show of contrition from
those involved in the sabotage we have detailed, the right in both the
PLP and senior sections of the party bureaucracy will be unlikely to
accept, permanently, compromise with both the membership and the
leadership. We are concerned that the necessary push to remake the
Party, to make use of all the talents and capacities of the membership
will be resisted by this faction precisely because it undermines so
strongly their conception of what the Party should be. This is not only
a question of the form the Party should take, but of how its
democratisation would entail taking policy-making out of the backrooms
and onto – even beyond – the conference floor. This will further
undermine their unaccountable power and class interests, as well as
their function of representing these ruling class interests within the
Labour Party.

Furthermore, it remains necessary to push for the democratisation of
candidate selection, including for mandatory reselection, and for the
subjecting of the party bureaucracy to the membership, beginning with
the election of its General Secretary. This would ensure that a reached
compromise could be enforced, that the capacities and skills of those
who worked tirelessly for a Labour victory are foregrounded, and that
those who continue to disrupt our prospects and aim to disconnect from
the Party’s base can be removed. The outcome of the election has clearly
demonstrated the appetite for the policies promoted by the movement
around Jeremy Corbyn. It is now more crucial than ever that revanchist
elements within the Labour Party, whose hostility both has been
ostentatiously displayed and has already proven damaging, must not be
allowed to sabotage its future electoral progress.

[^post-14-1]: Hilary Wainwright, *A Tale of Two Parties*, London,
    Hogarth, 1987, p. 33.

[^post-14-2]: Antonio Gramsci, *Selections from the Prison Notebooks*,
    London, Lawrence and Wishart, 1973, p. 211.
