Islington Redefined
===================

by [Jude Wanga](https://twitter.com/judeinlondon)

Islington is a borough that can't be separated from the notion of
gentrification. Across much of the media, and peppered in conversations
and assumptions, it is derided as the dwelling of Guardian-reading,
latte-sipping metropolitan luvvies who are out of touch with modern
life.

That these ideas are propagated by those employed by the Guardian and
similar organisations, is ironic, as they fit most closely to this
standard. It should mark them out as those out of touch with modern
life, because it means they barely notice what is going on around them
in Islington, away from the main roads. This pervasive stereotype that
has permeated any discussion on Corbynism or the future of the Labour
Party must be put to rest.

Even the most expensive area in Islington North is home to more
diversity than is ever discussed. I spoke to an Iraqi couple who had
been there for almost forty years, pre-dating Corbyn’s time as the local
MP. They moved in 1979, and the wife of the couple said, when people
“found out that \[they\] were the new proprietors of the corner shop,
rubbish was left outside of our door, people knocking on windows,
kicking the door late at night.”

While the couple chose to ignore the provocations, the taunting
eventually relented. When they moved to Islington then was just one
black person in the neighbourhood, but “over time this changed and
Islington became more multicultural” which they both like and
appreciate.

But there is another story, which has gone hand-in-hand with
gentrification. The couple “would prefer more friendly neighbourhood
vibes” but finds that “such is the snobbery that comes with this area”,
it is not possible to interact and integrate with the richer residents
who have moved in over the past two decades.

Robbie is 33 and lives in the neighbouring constituency of Islington
South. Raised on a council estate with working class parents, originally
from the East End, he had ethnic minority best friends, and an Asian
neighbour. I asked him how he came to find himself sharing Britain First
posts.

> At my house we used to read The Sun and The Daily Mail a lot, well my
> parents did anyway. So everyday I was seeing or reading about how
> immigrants were coming into the UK. My dad had recently lost his job
> as a contractor so money was tight at home, and he got really angry
> and depressed about it. He blamed the new intake of Polish builders
> and so did I.

This feeling isn't just limited to Robbie. In the week following the
murder of Lee Rigby, Muslims from Finsbury Park mosque were attacked
including women and a child. This culminated in a controversial event at
the Islington War Memorial, where EDL members were in attendance and got
into arguments with the local Islington labour members.

> The memorial is probably the first time I realised EDL weren't really
> concerned about the things I was concerned about. I stood there
> watching them argue with people who were there to do the same thing as
> us, pay respect to Lee, and it made me feel really ill. I left
> thinking 'what've I got myself into?

Robbie started scrutinising EDL posts more carefully, trying to see how
they correlated with his own experience of living in Islington.

> I couldn't understand how what they were saying could be true if I
> wasn't seeing it everyday. I have Muslim neighbours and they've always
> been so good to my family. They gave my dad work when he was laid off.
> How could they be the enemy? I was grateful for the sense of community
> I had growing up, it helped me avoid the wrong road that lay before me

The presence of families like Robbie's are erased from any narrative of
Islington you find in more mainstream media. The same media who fail to
recognise in their cliches just how divided Islington is.

Islington’s council funding has been [cut by half since
2010](https://www.islington.gov.uk/about-the-council/funding-and-spending/council-budget-cuts),
which in part has put pressure on the amount of social housing that can
be built and maintained. In 2014, the average cost of renting a
two-bedroom flat in the [private sector was
£2,308](http://www.homesandproperty.co.uk/property-news/renting/the-average-cost-of-renting-in-every-london-borough-33526.html#gallery).
The average salary of Islington means that those on private rents would
devote around three-quarters of their [salary to
renting](http://metro.co.uk/2015/11/18/how-does-your-salary-compare-with-the-rest-of-the-country-5511194/).

Despite the image of Islington, there are plenty of residents struggling
to make ends meet, [the credit
score](https://www.clearscore.com/blog/which-london-borough-is-the-most-financially-savvy)
of the average Islington resident is in line with those in the rest of
inner London, compared to the substantially higher scores of more
uniformly affluent boroughs in outer areas. Emily Thornberry, another of
Islington’s MPs, [describes being overwhelmed by the intricacies of
housing
problems](http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/emily-thornberry/housing-london-property_b_7220754.html),
provided across all sectors - this illustrates the pressure that there
is to give people good quality, affordable housing.

Between 2010-2014, before the full effects of cuts to housing and
councils hit, only [1800 affordable homes were
built](https://www.islington.gov.uk//~/media/sharepoint-lists/public-records/housing/businessplanning/policies/20142015/20140603housingstrategy20142019).
The council have tried to provide more, but funding [can only go so
far](https://www.islington.gov.uk/housing/finding-a-home/council-housing/the-housing-register).
With shortages already evident before 2010, the situation has become
exacerbated and more stark. This is often cited as a reason for people
to turn to more conservative politics, under the guise that local
infrastructure is limited and strained due to the impact of immigration.

The Blue Labour project, which aims to recapture lost working class
Labour voters by basically offering them One Nation Conservativism,
exploits the loss of working class Labour votes to the Tories and UKIP
by suggesting the party needs to attempt to outflank these two parties
from the right. This is incorrect and will lead the party into perilous
waters.

Because the unspoken truth is that Blue Labour can only work by holding
onto a descriptor of the working class that no longer fits the reality
of working class Britain, Indeed a lot of the indicators for affluent
metropolitan areas - diverse, multicultural ignore the fact that black
and minority ethnics are the fastest growing subsection of the working
class.

Given that black and minority ethnics are also the lowest paid, and most
likely to live in social housing or be in precarious work or unemployed,
the Blue Labour ideology neither reflects nor accommodates this
significant demographic.

Moreover, further complicating the sometimes implied, often explicit
opposition Blue Labour thinking relies on between “Islington” as a
symbol for a liberal, multicultural, comfortably-off metropolist and the
authentic spaces of “left-behind Britain”. The rise in far right
sympathies with Britain First and EDL was not restricted to traditional
working class Labour towns. Indeed these groups were seducing even those
living in urban multicultural areas who had grown up around diversity
with Robbie not atypical.

Islington has seen many changes over sixty years, with early gentrifiers
and then the property boom of the late nineties which has seen
hyper-gentrification of previously ignored areas such as Holloway,
Finsbury Park and Tufnell Park. Yet over that same period Islington
North has only had four MPs. The strength of constituency MPs in
fostering good community cohesion is the true story of Islington. It's
how Chris Smith was able to keep his seat in 1983 following SDP
challenge, it's how Islington South's current MP, Emily Thornberry, was
able to hold on to the seat in 2005 with a majority of just 484. She
would increase this to 20,263 in 2017. It's what has kept Islington
North returning Jeremy Corbyn for thirty four years.

Whether it's the Irish community in Archway, the Somalian community in
Finsbury Park, the Chinese & Turkish associations in Hornsey and
Holloway or the [few
remaining](http://www.closedpubs.co.uk/london/n1_islington.html) working
class pubs, you will find stories from Islington's forgotten residents
of how their MP helped them and never forgot them. One Finsbury Park
resident is so grateful to Corbyn she regularly sends him gifts,
prompting him to reply thanking her but kindly requesting no more gifts.

The point here is that Corbyn and Thornberry have kept their seats where
other Labour figures have lost theirs. While the demographics of the
area may favour this, that has not been the bulwark of safety for other
MPs in similar areas. Corbyn and Thornberry reflect in their national
politics what they have adopted in their constituency. They look to take
care of the most vulnerable, particularly over housing matters, but they
also work with everyone in their area to make sure that minorities are
not left without a voice. It has not been perfect, but it has been a
marker to give their names credibility often in spite of the party they
have represented. The lesson is not that Labour needs to abandon its key
principles, which these two MPs embrace, but that the wider party can
show how a more sensitive approach to immigration, amongst other things,
can be a positive position to operate, not a defensive one.

Islington's public buildings boast the name of great Labour figures of
past - from Keir Hardie Estate to Margaret McMillan nursery to Wilfred
Feinburgh Court, named for the Islington North MP of 1951. No doubt in
years to come there will be an Emily Thornberry Estate or Corbyn Court
in the borough, as these two MPs take their place in Islington's long
Labour history.
