Northern Ireland, The DUP and Colonialism
=========================================

by [Rosa Gilbert](https://twitter.com/rosagilbert)

The province of Northern Ireland has been continually raised as a
spectre during the election campaign and is now once more on the
forefront of the political agenda. Not because its government hasn’t
functioned since February, not because of its high levels of poverty,
high rates of unemployment and low living standards, with some of the
most deprived neighbourhoods in the UK, but because some of the MPs
categorised within the “Northern Ireland” 18 parliamentary seats will be
propping up the Conservative government.

Despite the fact that these 18 seats are depicted in statistics as a
sideshow, grouped together rather than by party name, this is far from
the first time that parliamentarians sent from Northern Ireland to
Westminster have played a fundamental role in the machinations of
government. In 1979, the SDLP’s Gerry Fitt refused to support the then
Prime Minister James Callaghan’s vote of confidence because of the
repeated allegations of brutality in the Royal Ulster Constbulary’s
interrogation centre at Castlereagh – Callaghan lost the vote by one and
the subsequent general election to Margaret Thatcher. In 2008, Gordon
Brown and Harriet Harman made a deal with the DUP for their support for
a counter-terrorism measure to increase detention without charge from 28
days to 42 days – which subsequently failed to get through the Lords –
by backtracking on plans to extend the 1967 Abortion Act to Northern
Ireland. Women who live in those six counties, who nevertheless pay into
the NHS, [do not have access to
abortion](https://newsocialist.org.uk/a-missing-link-british-attitudes-towards-abortion-in/)
and face prosecution and imprisonment if they seek it under legislation
dating from 1861, and if they choose to travel to Britain, are required
to pay for NHS abortions.

What is striking about the potential for the DUP to be propping up the
flailing Tory government is that is encapsulates the utter
constitutional mess of the post-conflict settlement in Northern Ireland.
More significantly, it demonstrates how the continued British occupation
of Ireland is a hindrance to socialism across these islands. As the
maxim goes, a nation that oppresses another can never itself be free.

Whilst the Good Friday Agreement lends credence to the neutrality of the
British state in its relationship to the quasi-autonomous governing
parties in Northern Ireland, the dominance of the Conservative Party
undermines this in its relationship with Ulster unionists. Its full name
after all is the Conservative and Unionist Party, and in the past it has
stood under a joint ticket with the Ulster Unionist Party. Subsequent
British governments oversaw, to a greater or lesser extent, a military
policy in Northern Ireland which strengthened links between security
forces and loyalist paramilitaries. Loyalist paramilitary groups like
the Ulster Defence Association (UDA) and Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF)
were used by the British in their dirty war against both armed
republicanism and broader pro-republican civil society groups, with a
high proportion of state and loyalist casualties being civilians (54%
and 87% respectively). Undeniably, the political wing of loyalism gained
a massive strategic and propaganda coup when the British military
refused to break the Ulster Workers’ Council strike of 1974, killing off
the more mainstream reformist Ulster unionism and its attempts at
power-sharing under the Sunningdale Agreement. Clearly, British state
forces had existential reasoning for its relationships with loyalist
paramilitaries, but the Conservative Party found its ideological partner
in some of the more extreme elements of Ulster loyalism – Vanguard
Unionist leader and former Minister for Home Affairs William Craig
visited the Conservative Party’s infamous Monday Club in 1972 to declare
that he was prepared to ‘shoot to kill’ in defence of Ulster. The
following year, just 8 months before loyalist bombs in Dublin and
Monaghan caused the bloodiest day of the Troubles, Craig repeated this
affirmation of extra-judicial murder along with a call for ‘direct
action against business people and holiday-makers from the Republic’.

Notwithstanding the British state and the Conservative Party’s
longstanding attachment to the cause of Ulster unionism and some of its
shadier branches of virulent and violent loyalism, the current juncture
should be understood as a reformulation of this political tinderbox,
thanks to the intersecting constitutional crossroads that have come to a
head after years of stultification, obstructing the potential for
Anglo-Irish relations to be resolved once and for all. An informal
governing arrangement between the Tories and the DUP will help to
embolden the DUP’s voice at a time when the power-sharing arrangements
in Northern Ireland are under a great deal of strain. Attempting to
placate the DUP with financial bungs as a form of confidence and supply
will further embed unionist rule at the expense of nationalists as the
former present themselves as the gatekeepers of investment and
governance in the region. After the collapse of Sunningdale in 1974, the
unionists were able to hold the threat of an Independent Ulster
arrangement, inspired by Ian Smith's Unilateral Declaration of
Independence in Rhodesia over the British government, who responded with
continued industrial investment at a time when it was disappearing
across Britain; indeed, two months after the strike the Harland and
Wolff shipyards were nationalised at a time when government subsidy to
shipyards in Britain was being cut.

The inertia of Northern Ireland’s state mechanisms are nothing new,
although the current situation is symptomatic of much longer-term
causes, not least those outlined by the likes of Nairn and Anderson that
the British state is an anachronism (an 'indefensible and unadaptable
relic, not a modern state-form') that survives having failed to fully
deal with issues of state and sovereignty that led elsewhere to the
birth of the modern nation states.[^post-23-1] In line with the
so-called revisionist historians of the British Empire, I’d also include
the continued failure to fully account for British imperialism and to
deal with decolonisation, which has arguably not been concluded let
alone confronted in the national psyche. The more medium-term causes
include demographic and generational shifts that have contributed to the
ascendency of Sinn Féin, namely the growth of the Catholic population
and the increasing disassociation of new members of Sinn Féin with
republican paramilitaries. In February the Stormont executive broke down
and the subsequent assembly elections resulted in a loss of a majority
for unionists for the first time since the inception of the state in
1922. Talks to come up with a power-sharing arrangement for the
executive stalled and failed, and the governance of the province is
still in limbo, with the dark cloud of direct rule hanging over it.
There were a number of reasons for the breakdown of the government and
subsequent stalemate, including Arlene Foster’s responsibility for the
[Renewable Heat Incentive
scandal](http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-northern-ireland-38301428) and
failure to accept the blame, the refusal of the DUP to honour the rights
of the Catholic minority through an Irish Language Act, and one of the
most concerning aspects which was the lack of provisions given to the
legacy mechanisms provided for in the Good Friday Agreement.

When Jeremy Corbyn refused to be coaxed into condemning IRA violence in
isolation, he was merely fulfilling the principles set out in the Good
Friday Agreement – one of the central tenets was in providing equal
access to justice and recompense for all communities and all victims of
the conflict, rather than prioritising and creating an unjust hierarchy
of victimhood, a hierarchy that had dominated media and political
discourse around the conflict since it flared up in 1969. There are fair
accusations to make that the Good Friday Agreement did this
insufficiently and imperfectly by further entrenching sectarianism, but
the main thrust of it dealt with a situation which was hitherto
prioritising an archetype of victimhood at the expense of others,
effectively erasing the victims of state violence. The Saville Inquiry
into Bloody Sunday has been one such recompense; others include the
establishment of Historical Enquiries Team and police ombudsman to
investigate unresolved murders. These were not entirely adequate – in
2013 the HET faced criticism from the independent police inspectorate
for not investigating deaths caused by the police or military with
sufficient rigour, no doubt thanks to the revolving door of retiring
officers of the now-defunct RUC finding employment in the HET or Legacy
Support Unit. The HET was dissolved in 2014 thanks to a 7% policing
budget cut, despite the fact it had made public documents that shone
light onto a number of atrocities involving British state collusion
including the McGurk’s Bar bombing and the activities of the notorious
Glenanne Gang, a UVF death squad who killed mainly Catholic civilians
with assistance from UDR and RUC Special Patrol Group and Special Branch
officers.

Progress has been sluggish, and there are many cases in which truth and
justice is not forthcoming. The Dublin and Monaghan bombs – the most
fatal attack during the entirety of the Troubles – is widely believed to
have involved security force collusion tied to the Glenanne Gang, and
yet the British government refuse to hand over key documents. This lack
of recourse to justice for victims of state violence is a real
grievance, and coupled with a British government that wishes to grant
amnesties to British soldiers and openly attacks human rights lawyers
who attempt to hold them to account, compounds the stalemate that
currently incapacitates Stormont. It also adds to the state’s
deniability of its role as combatant, something which the Conservative
Party has seemingly put front and centre of its policy in Northern
Ireland. The Good Friday Agreement is reliant on the goodwill of all
participating parties, including the general populace which includes a
high proportion of people suffering from trauma, family bereavement,
adjusting to life after imprisonment, in some cases aborted hunger
strike, and the consequences of living through conflict which affects
educational attainment, employment as well as material factors like
housing and financial concerns. By disregarding the fragile peace that
the cessation of hostilities and political settlement that the Good
Friday Agreement was supposed to bring, the zombie Tory government and
their lackeys in Stormont will further marginalise many of these people,
who already feel that the inadequate mechanisms which provide some
degree of recompense and justice have been undermined.

It’s a good thing that the regressive social and cultural attitudes of
the DUP have shocked so many British people, even if it shows how
pitiful our collective political consciousness is when it comes to the
six counties. But these attitudes and more profoundly the legal
mechanisms that sustain them emerge from somewhere, namely the bitter
religious sectarian rivalries that took hold in a country in which
national identity was a key economic signifier over centuries of settler
colonialism. As such, contending with these deeply offensive and harmful
attitudes requires a struggle deeper than pushing a human rights agenda.
Indeed it requires no less than a comprehensive unpicking of the history
of British rule in Ireland and the role of partition. The state of
Northern Ireland is less than 100 years old, and its inherent precarity
is a major explanation both of the current constitutional situation and
the chokehold of Ulster unionism/loyalism. In these strange times of
simultaneous stasis and fast-moving political events, I can’t help but
think of Marx’s line that “the crisis is permanent, the government only
provisional.” The current constitutional crisis in Northern Ireland and
the situation in Westminster should be instructive for the left. It
should bury the notion once and for all that the national question is no
longer a factor and that the Good Friday Agreement has dealt with
communal differences. Sectarianism and community division is worse than
ever, and the Good Friday Agreement has simply papered over the cracks,
coming to a halfway house agreement that reinforces the positions of the
nationalist and unionist politicians and the reliance of the Catholic
and Protestant people on them. Class politics and economic grievances
pale into insignificance as fear of the other trumps the low standards
of living and rising rates of unemployment. Women are betrayed by
nationalist and unionist politicians alike as the fidelity of their
voters remains reliant on the respective churches. Sinn Féin’s rejection
of the 1967 Abortion Act based on its concern of British involvement in
Ireland should be read as a misnomer, since they willingly voted for the
Westminster government to administer welfare reforms in December 2015;
clearly, they are more worried about their Catholic base deserting them
for the SDLP. Meanwhile, the DUP’s continued role in Westminster
politics denies us the Tory collapse and second election which could see
a socialist leader swept to power. Whilst Britain continues its
faux-neutral role in Ireland, true recourse to justice is stunted; women
are still denied bodily autonomy; and right-wing extremists continue to
prop up a government whose official policy powers in Northern Ireland
are limited by devolution, denying all of us self-determination. It’s
time for the left in this country to face up to the constitutional
wreckage that is the United Kingdom, a concept on borrowed time, and
took a bold stance on the national question in Ireland – Brits out.

[^post-23-1]: Tom Nairn, *The Break-Up of Britain: Crisis and
    Neo-Nationalism*, London: Verso, 1981, p. 63.
