Community Solidarity after Grenfell
===================================

by [Eleanor White](https://twitter.com/pastelchalk)

On the 14th of June early morning, I couldn't sleep due to the heat and
my ongoing battle with insomnia. I was scrolling through twitter trying
to pass time and boredom when I found out about the Grenfell fire. When
images of the fire began to emerge, the only thing I could think of was
how unbearable the summer heat was, and how the fire would have only
exacerbated the intense heatwave we have been having in London for the
locals who lived nearby. I just presumed there wouldn't be victims. But
how wrong was I? I live just over 5 miles away from Grenfell in South
London and was able to smell the fire as it was happening early in the
morning.

As I woke up the next day, I realised that things were a lot worse than
I had initially thought.. News of locals helping organise donations of
clothes and toiletries began to appear on social media. . Here were
local residents and different community groups taking time out to help
those who had lost everything. It showed how we can come together in
solidarity regardless of our national, ethnic or religious backgrounds
for those in need, with the and how willing people were to donate in a
situation where the local authorities gave out very little information.
It seemed to go into overdrive when I went there on Thursday late
afternoon. No one knew anything about how many survivors there actually
were or even how many people had died, but people kept on wanting to
donate goods. It seemed never ending - all these people arriving with
goods for victims.

The overwhelming majority of donations came from normal, everyday
working class people, which is somewhat outrageous considering how
disgustingly wealthy the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea is. I
met women and men from Liverpool, Birmingham, and Kent who had travelled
to help, religious groups from Bromley, Brighton and Plymouth as well.
From every religious background too, various Muslim groups, Jewish
groups, Sikh groups and plenty of individual Christians. These people
were ordinary folk who just wanted to help their fellow human beings in
their time of greatest need. A lot of them had been involved with
collections for refugees in Calais and in Greece as well, while for
others this was their first time being involved with such a large-scale
community effort. None of these people had any connection with the
Council of the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea, let alone any
governmental body connection at all. The local authorities were nowhere
to be seen and were not responding to anyone’s calls about where the
sorted donations were supposed to be going.

While the generosity shown by people from normal, everyday working class
backgrounds was touching and powerful, what had the greatest impact on
me were those donations that came from those from stereotypically, white
middle-class people. The yummy mummy in her maroon coloured 4x4 Range
Rover to deliver bags of goods and as I was checking to see if they were
clean, I noticed blood stains on the bed sheets. These donations were
completely unacceptable.

Another volunteer I was speaking to had a similar experience, a woman
had arrived with designer paper bags and in them were black sacks of
clothes. She opened the black sacks and in them there were various
coats, but they were damp. And as she took them out of the bag she
realised there was mould growing in the armpit of one of the coats in
particular and it was also growing on all the other coats as well. And
there was the white woman who came down to volunteer but then left not
long after - she didn't like "the tension in the air", because there
were a few black and brown people rightfully frustrated, angry and
annoyed by the traumatising events of what had happened.

That being said, the cross-community collaboration to support those in
need was amazing. With the Grenfell Tower fire happening right in the
middle of Ramadan, there were lots of Muslims fasting and staying
together while breaking their fasts together, but still coming out to
help those in need, every single day since the fire. The overwhelming
sense of community I felt from everyone coming together was amazing - it
shows, by force of example, that there is an alternative to the cruel,
austere and uncaring values of the ruling class that have been force-fed
to us for so long.

While I was packing boxes with for survivors on Thursday 16th, there was
one Muslim guy who kept on calling me "sister" and "Queen Irish". He was
fasting but he made sure everyone was drinking enough fluids in the dry
dead humid heat. He then delivered a massive Iftar meal for all,
regardless of religion. He got me some food before himself. When I
declined because I wanted him to eat something before me he said,
"Sister I fast so I can appreciate those around me, helping our fellow
human beings".

And there was the Bosnian woman, who was easily twice my age, who told
me I would make a good mother because I was able to calm down some
rightfully annoyed teenaged boys, local to Grenfell Tower who were
arguing about whether or not there should be a riot. One-half of the
group kept on arguing that they wouldn't be listened to if there was a
riot and the other half was arguing that they would never get listened
to if there wasn't a riot. I only intervened to prevent the boys from
taking out their frustrations on each other physically, as things got
quite heated very quickly.

They calmed down and helped us pack boxes for the survivors, then one of
the boys asked me where in Ireland I was from and wanted to know why
Sinn Fein wouldn’t go into coalition with Labour. He pronounced Sinn
Fein as Sin Fee-Inn, much to my amusement. And I explained because every
MP has to take a vow of loyalty to the Queen and as Sinn Fein support
Irish reunification and an end to British imperialism in Ireland they
wouldn't. He was kinda shocked by this and said, "but I wouldn't want to
do that for the Queen when she's so filthy rich", along with him calling
her an "inbred fuck" and that he agreed with Sinn Fein because the
British had been "annoying" the Irish for too long. To say this
conversation was surreal would be an understatement. Here was at most a
16-year-old black working class Londoner, telling me he supported Irish
reunification and agreed with Sinn Fein and wanted an end to the Royal
family.

Latymer church, over time, has become kind of a meeting point, where
local businesses and various different churches, mosques and temples and
individuals are all coming together to share food for free for this new
community.. Along with them were some not so local businesses and more
some commercial interests - such as phone networks handing out water and
sim cards to locals. The most surprising business participating in all
of this was an estate agency who had an ice cream van handing out free
ice cream on the Saturday 18th. This really startled me because estate
agencies are the same people profiting from the housing crisis in the
UK, and depriving people of their deposits and not putting them into
tenancy deposit schemes as they are legally required to and skirting
around the law for their own convenience while putting total fear into
their clients in minimum wage jobs scared about paying rent 2 days late,
and them getting shouted down the phone at by some condescending ego
driven estate agent.

The survivors of Grenfell Tower deserve the best and only the best. Just
because someone has lost everything doesn't mean they are entitled to
only the scraps from your table and the rags from the wardrobes of your
privileged middle-class lifestyles. Dumping designer mattresses beside
local churches to Grenfell Tower may seem like the right thing to you
but those that come from working class and/or immigrant backgrounds and
that live in social housing do not need your soiled, dirty clothes
because your consumptive waste isn't fit for human purpose. The victims
of Grenfell at the end of the day, are also human just like you yummy
mummies, and Tory loving bankers.

Grenfell is a bleak reminder of how the class divide in the UK, and
globally, is a constant injustice that is literally killing those that
are working class he white upper middle classes of the UK like to think
about the working class as not being deserving or being as hard working
but this is just an attempt to skirt round the issue.

Adequate housing is a human right and one would assume that adequate
safe housing for all should be a top priority for any government in
power, regardless of their class status, but, alas, in Tory austerity
Britain, it is not. Housing should be a top priority regardless of their
class background. And with the total sheer fuck up by Theresa May in
terms of an adequate response and how little has been even clarified by
the RBKC Council regarding this shows how little the life of those from
the working classes matters to the Tories. The death toll being slowly
revealed suggests that it's deliberately being spaced out to prevent any
rightful outrage and it’s a cover up - that much is obvious. But
Grenfell was 100% preventable and now innocent working class adults and
children from migrant backgrounds had to die for profit.

They are few but we are many.
