Class Interests and Campaigning in 2017
=======================================

by [Edie Miller](https://twitter.com/@multiplebears)

Some [insightful comparisons have been drawn in recent
weeks](https://nplusonemag.com/online-only/online-only/new-hope-for-britain/)
between the Labour Party’s platform at the recent general election and
their platform in 1983. The 1983 election saw Jeremy Corbyn and Tony
Blair, two future Labour leaders – from opposite ends of what often
feels like a yawning, cavernous gulf of an intra-party political
spectrum – take their seats in Parliament. Labour’s heavy defeat under
Michael Foot in 1983, interpreted as a decisive rejection of the
“longest suicide note in history” manifesto, which in some regards
starkly echoes the one that was welcomed by 41% of voters earlier this
month, heralded the decline of class as a motivating factor in British
politics. The chasm of time elapsed and ideologies asserted – and
vanquished – between then and now is traversed by one ineluctable
thread, the treatment of class in our political discourse.

When Margaret Thatcher said in 1987 that there was ‘no such thing as
society,’ it wasn’t because it was true, but because she wanted it to be
true. Indeed, most of the Thatcherite project over her 11 years of
premiership could be understood as a crusade to will that idea into
reality, a bit like announcing the extinction of the ferret while
simultaneously heading up Britain’s most prolific manufacturer of
bespoke ferret-skin socks.

The effects of this attempt to destroy society, all the while profiting
from its destruction, have, as Thatcherism ossified into hegemony,
intensified over time. In the last week, the working class community of
Kensington – a phrase that until recently many people would have
regarded an oxymoron – pulled together to help feed, clothe and house
the former residents of the Grenfell tower block. Meanwhile journalists
took to the internet to crow their surprise that such a community
existed, much less was able to organise efficiently and effectively in
the gap left by a conspicuously absent state.

Class interests never left us, but class consciousness is undoubtedly
undergoing a resurgence in the UK. Several forces over the last 35 years
contributed to a decline, of class consciousness, including notably
Blairism’s politics of aspiration. Late last year I heard Tony Sewell,
CEO of Generating Genius, a charity that works with high achieving BAME
students from disadvantaged backgrounds, speak at my university.
Sewell’s model of social justice is one that relies heavily on social
mobility; he spoke of his delight in going to university and leaving the
other boys of his peer group behind in Brixton. Eighty years after the
Clydeside socialist John McLean implored his comrades to ‘rise with your
class, not out of it,’ Sewell founded an organisation based on the
opposite – plucking those deemed most deserving of salvation from their
deprived backgrounds (for Sewell, specifically boys, as he mentioned the
desire of young women and girls to ‘keep their nails nice’ as preventing
them from throwing them into STEM careers) and helping them into
education and towards prosperity, rather than trying to address the
systemic issues that disadvantaged them in the first place.

Social mobility and the politics of aspiration rely on an uneven keel,
mobility contrasts with stasis, aspirations fulfilled with aspirations
quashed. Aspiration fundamentally weakens the capacity for class unity
and solidarity because it encourages people to identify with groups of
which they are not actually part. You might have nice curtains, you
might have managed to get your kids into the best state school possible
for your area. But so long as you rely on tax credits to pay the rent,
and need the NHS as a safety net for when the worst happens, it is
simply not in your materials interests to vote from the perspective of
someone who doesn’t.

In the *[Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis
Napoleon](https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/subject/hist-mat/18-brum/ch07.htm)*,
Marx employs the unflattering metaphor of French peasant households as
potatoes in sacks: ‘consequently incapable of enforcing their class
interest in their own name, whether through a parliament or through a
convention.’ This dismissal comes from a contrast with the industrial
proletariat, which in regular close contact at the site of production
was able to develop a class consciousness and institutional forms of a
class for-itself. The fragmented peasantry, by contrast, was politically
passive, its sole political function being to vote and, largely, to vote
in support of reactionary parties. Of course, this miserabilist view of
class organisation is not quite so defeatist as it immediately seems:
potatoes sustained workforces for hundreds of years, and (trust me, I
grew up hefting bags of them around) they’re pretty fucking heavy when
you chuck them. As is only correct, this damning analysis of the
condition of any oppressed class contains within it an acknowledgment of
its potential – thus, a green sprout of hope.

While doorstepping for Labour in the weeks before the election, one of
the most uncomfortable experiences I had was with an older man in a tiny
house to the north of Colchester, where I live. He had a long term
health problem, and was completely reliant on the NHS to keep him alive.
His 30 year old daughter was in a similar situation and on a zero hours
contract which meant that, although she had only managed to secure two
days of work in the last month, she wasn’t eligible for welfare – the
two of them were scraping by on his pension.

The daughter in particular was lovely, and adamant that something had to
change. The older man on the other hand simply wouldn’t trust me, he was
certain that there had been no cuts to the NHS, and so we quickly found
ourselves at an impasse. Even as I tried to drum up the figures and put
them in context, I was met with a solid ‘well, that’s just your
opinion’. I know how I must have looked, standing on this poor bloke’s
doorstep in a bright red t-shirt with a votelabour hashtag on it,
talking with a northern accent, like some wide-eyed transplanted
activist who fell out of the sky and somehow, by serendipity or bad
luck, landed in North Essex. Of course he didn’t believe me. How could I
seem to him like I was living a life anything like his? But the truth is
I am. I get by on just over £8,000 a year, and I have health problems
that mean that without the NHS I would almost certainly be dead. Unlike
some on the right of the party, I wasn’t canvassing for Labour out of a
sense of charity, it’s in my interest to vote for them just as much as
it is his.

I didn’t manage to convince him that cuts to the NHS were a fact not an
opinion, though a better activist might have done. The question of how
best to communicate Labour’s message to voters like these remains of
course, though I’m glad to see the decline of the prevailing wisdom of
the last decade that the answer is ‘more racism.’ Finally we seem to
have reached a point where it is possible to offer a positive message to
counter a thoroughly negative situation, rather than throwing more
negativity at it and wondering why the air of the political climate
increases in toxicity.

The work done by the idea of ‘opinion’ here is important. Take for
example the numerous quizzes and websites like [Vote for
Policies](https://voteforpolicies.org.uk/), that allow voters to pick
blind from lists of policies offered by different parties, choosing the
ones that most appeal to them – the idea being that they will then be
given a definitive answer as to which party they ought to vote for.
Surely a better model would be this: a website where the voter can input
their earnings; their gender identity; their ethnicity; their health
status; whether they rent or own their home (if indeed they have one);
whether they’re anti- or pro- the fiery destruction of all things… and
be advised on how they should vote from there. It makes no sense to
treat voting like a ‘What’s the Right Summer Music Festival for You?’
quiz in *GQ* or *Cosmopolitan*, when the truth is that the government we
have is able to determine our right to live or die, to wither or to
thrive.

The commentariat driven political culture of the past couple of decades
has, too, seen opinions transmuted into fact; but also vice versa. I
recognise the irony of my writing this in what is essentially an opinion
piece, but it remains true that too often the voices that speak to us as
a nation are white, Oxbridge educated, and materially wealthy enough to
benefit from the decline of a society organised along class lines, as
opposed to the reassertion of it.

One thing I have found particularly refreshing about Corbyn’s campaign
is that the vision he offers is not one we are supposed to accept
because we ‘like’ it, rather because we need it; because austerity
kills, and we cannot go on like this. When Cameron and Osborne tightened
the nation’s belt, people choked to death. This is what the Labour Party
needs to emphasise in the next few months, and indeed when it — as now
seems both possible and plausible — eventually forms a government.
People, especially the poor and the young, have been forced to realise
afresh in the last few years, that we can no longer base our politics on
what we want, or how we see ourselves through the rose-tinted glasses of
aspiration, but on what we need – in order to survive, and to live a
good life. Even without the traditional institutional forms that
unified, to an extent, the industrial working class as a class
for-itself, in this election the response to ever tightening pressure
has been for Marx’s sack of potatoes to throw itself hard at the ruling
class.

This is the reality of the reassertion of class interest and
organisation in 2017: the forces that attempted to divide us have
failed, precisely because they failed us. When all is said and done, we
will always return to the bosom of the collective when we need it, as we
do now more than ever.
