No Time For Game Theory
=======================

by [Dominic Fox](http://www.codepoetics.com/blog/)

In a [recent
article](https://capx.co/all-that-matters-now-is-stopping-corbyn/)
reflecting on the (first) 2017 General Election, the right-wing
economist Andrew Lilico speculates in the following terms on the
motivations of younger voters:

> We also need to better grasp the cosmetic impact for young people of
> policies such as those on EU citizens. In my experience, younger
> people could not understand any good reason for threatening to deport
> three million people and did not always have the historical
> perspective to be confident that wouldn’t really happen. They saw it
> as hateful and I suspect it was an important motivation to get out and
> vote.

The imputation is that young people, lacking any deeper understanding of
the interests and strategies in play, were moved by a “cosmetic” and
emotional reaction to Theresa May’s stance on the right of EU workers to
remain and continue working in Britain. Since “all that matters now is
stopping Corbyn”, Lilico suggests that measures be taken to mollify
young voters, such as offering “a political guarantee that whatever
cut-off date is used for changing the rights of EU citizens, anyone here
by June 23 2016 will be allowed to stay and work”: this is not quite the
same as conceding that they may actually have had a point.

What is the “historical perspective” to which Lilico alludes, and what
possible “good reason” might there be for “threatening to deport three
million people”? An “historical perspective” taking in the forced mass
migrations and expulsions of the past two centuries - to say nothing of
the current, ongoing refugee crisis - would not seem to give grounds for
confidence that things will turn out all right in the end. Many EU
citizens of my acquaintance are genuinely worried about their position;
their concern isn’t the sort of warm-hearted solicitude for the
wellbeing of others that Lilico presumably finds superficial, but is
based on a clear-eyed evaluation of the risks directly affecting them.

I would like to suggest that the “good reason” Theresa May has for
placing the livelihood of three million people in doubt is actually very
well understood by young voters, and that it belongs to a wider
political logic which, in rallying to Corbyn and the 2017 Labour
Manifesto, they are explicitly rejecting. The same logic is behind the
ridiculous and tiresome spectacle of media figures repeatedly attempting
to “corner” Corbyn on the topic of nuclear retaliation. As the comedian
Frankie Boyle astutely observes, honour would very nearly have been
satisfied if Corbyn had openly declared that he was ready and willing to
order a nuclear first strike against Russia, whilst winking broadly at
the camera. The point isn’t that you have to mean it, but that you have
to be prepared to say it as if you mean it. (The wink would have
undermined that, of course). One of the things that the UK political
class demands of its leaders is “credibility” on this subject, which has
come to be positioned as an index of political “credibility” in general:
the received wisdom before the election was that May possessed this
(indeed, it was her prime political asset), and Corbyn didn’t. Now, like
so many other things, it turns out that it doesn’t matter in quite the
way, or to quite the degree, that we were constantly being exhorted to
treat it as mattering.

“Credibility”, in this context, means the ability to present a
negotiating position that is ruinously extreme and unreasonable on its
face, in order to convince a negotiating partner to make concessions so
that this position will be taken off the table. Your opponent must
believe that you are willing to risk disaster, or must at least be
expected to behave as if they believe it. This confrontation between two
“as if”s - one party making a threat as if they intend to carry it out,
the other offering concessions as if they take the threat seriously - is
seen by many in the political class as the essence of politics. It’s how
the sort of (frankly, loathsome) people who aspire to eminence in the
Oxford Union carry on in their dealings with their rivals and
co-conspirators. The politics of which this is the essence is a sort of
shadow-play in which sincerity is always understood to be instrumental,
a token, something more or less successfully faked.

Corbyn has managed to practice consistently, and has come to represent
personally, an alternative approach to politics in which credibility
comes from building trust: people believe what you say because they’ve
seen you act on it, risk something for it, rather than because you can
maintain a convincing posture of “strength” or willingness to go
nuclear. Core to this is his rejection of the friend/enemy distinction
as the basis for political organisation. In Corbyn’s view, you speak to
Hamas, or the IRA, as “friends” not because you are fundamentally in
agreement with their politics or condone their activities, but because
you want to negotiate with them on a basis of increasing trust and
inclusivity, rather than as Cold War-era nuclear antagonists trying to
stare each other down. Corbyn’s [recent letter to Theresa
May](http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/politics/jeremy-corbyns-full-letter-theresa-10639719)
concerning the Grenfell Tower disaster illustrates this well. He writes:

> Whilst I believe that the policies and priorities of your government
> in the arenas of social housing and public safety are legitimate
> targets for my criticism, I hope we both share a determination to
> discover the truths underpinning this tragedy so to avoid any
> repetition. For these reasons, in support of my hope to publicly
> welcome your decision, I would appreciate early consultation on your
> government’s proposed Inquiry Terms of Reference.

This is not without guile, and it is certainly not unchallenging, but it
is at the same time a sincere offer of co-operation. Because the offer
is fundamentally reasonable on the face of it, May is placed in the
position where she would, quite rightly, have to justify any decision
which fell short of demonstrating a commitment to “discover the truths
underpinning this tragedy”.

Corbyn’s letter works to establish a standard which both he and May can
either live up to or default from. His credibility in the matter rests
on his trustworthiness: the degree to which he can be expected not to
default. The outcome he is seeking is not one in which he can gain the
edge over an opponent, but rather one in which he can “publicly welcome”
May’s decision because she has chosen to do the right thing. The record
of Corbyn’s interactions in Parliament with the former Prime Minister
David Cameron shows that he was repeatedly prepared to be gracious when
his opposite number’s government had done something praiseworthy. His
lack of “killer instinct” in these encounters was often criticised as a
mark of political ineffectiveness, but in fact it was perfectly
consistent with the negotiating stance taken in this letter to May, a
letter which is far more likely to have caused her serious discomfort
than any amount of antagonistic browbeating.

I do not want to suggest that Corbyn is some sort of political saint, or
that the novelty and value of his approach to politics rests entirely on
his authenticity, sincerity or generosity. It is not so much a matter of
his distinctive personal qualities as of the political logic which
guides his behaviour. Rather than the logic of mutually-assured
destruction, of low- or zero-trust political manoeuvring, he has adopted
a high-trust, co-operative approach which aims at non-zero-sum outcomes.
For the Tories, whose political logic is founded on the friend/enemy
distinction, there are winners and losers, and your task in politics is
to make sure that you and your friends are the winners and your enemies
are the losers. The promise of “hard Brexit” is a promise to make this
happen: to try to “win” in negotiations with the European Union by
threatening a disastrous outcome if special consideration is not given
to Britain’s demands. This is similar to the promise made by Donald
Trump to the US electorate: vote for me, and I will “put America first”,
using my strength and cunning to “win” against the rest of the world.
Trump’s reputation as a swindler and a bully who has consistently
cheated his business partners may have made him seem like the sort of
person who could do this and get away with it - an ugly and
reprehensible champion, but an effective one. May went to the electorate
with a promise that she, too, was prepared to be ugly and reprehensible
in support of British interests: a [“bloody difficult
woman”](https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/may/02/may-juncker-will-find-me-bloody-difficult-woman-in-brexit-talks),
no less. But as [Craig Murray has
noted](https://www.craigmurray.org.uk/archives/2017/05/the-art-of-negotiation/),
outside of the political fantasies of House of Cards LARPers this is not
how diplomacy works: “the art of negotiation” is not at all like Trump’s
infantile conception of “the art of the deal”. For perhaps the first
time in decades, it appears that the Tories underestimated the emotional
maturity of the British electorate. Corbyn’s appeal, and his astonishing
success in the election, is due in part to the fact that he gave them
something better to live up to.
