Understanding and Building on the Manifesto
===========================================

by [Tom Gann](https://twitter.com/Tom_Gann)

The Manifesto after the Election Result
---------------------------------------

The General Election result not only settles the question of the Labour
leadership but also of the broad contours of the programme, at least in
terms of social and economic policy, for the next election. This
election could, of course, be only months away, and given the current
situation, it is not just a question of a programme to go into an
election with but, very likely, a programme to be enacted in government
(or, importantly, a programme that a left-led Labour government will
*try* to implement). However, whilst a broad direction of travel is
clear, there remains considerable space for struggle to build on the
manifesto and the campaign, many of whose themes were potentially more
radical than the
[manifesto](http://www.labour.org.uk/page/-/Images/manifesto-2017/labour-manifesto-2017.pdf)
and clearer expressions of a creative break with socially dominant
values. The struggle then is to push things further, to achieve greater
coherence and a fuller expression of new, socialist values, because it
would be more in tune with and responsive to popular demands, needs and
experiences (and, as I suggest later, there is a strong case for
“popular” here rather than “working class”, although the manifesto is a
class politics). There is a risk, that without vigilance, pressure and
bravery, of a slide back into positions which, while radical and
productive compared to Labour’s over the last 25 years, would impose
significant limits on our programme, both in terms of particular
policies and the wider social forces necessary to implement and develop
a left programme. This is because they involve more compromises with
reaction and are more timid about challenging the limitations of
existing social patterns, and would amount to a betrayal and a failure
to think and act deeply enough on the problems facing the UK today.

The Generation of New Values against Labourism
----------------------------------------------

In order fully to grasp the manifesto, it is necessary to take a
theoretical and historical diversion through the question of values. The
best foundation for understanding the manifesto as a deeply practical
project, as well as finding ways to build on it, to implement it, to
extend it, can be found in Raymond Williams’s *The Long Revolution*. In
*The Long Revolution*, Williams describes the “the very visible moral
decline of the labour movement” (embracing the Labour Party, Trade
Unions and Co-operatives). For Williams these bodies had
institutionalised, offered and discovered “ways of living that could be
extended to the whole of society, which could quite reasonably be
organised on the basis of collective democratic institutions and the
substitution of co-operative equality for competition as the principle
of social and economic policy”[^post-31-1]. However, for Williams,
whilst these bodies still paid lip service to socialism, in practice,
“some sections of the labour movement have gone over, almost completely,
to ways of thinking which they still formally oppose”[^post-31-2]. For
Williams this going over, whilst representing a moral decline, was also
strongly grounded in tendencies internal to the labour movement as much
as the pressure from the dominant organisation of society. He describes
three central tendencies that enabled the incorporation of the labour
movement in a position of qualified subordination; firstly, the
pressures against the universalising of values rooted in the
organisations of the labour movement also existing for sectional defence
and sectional self-interest;, secondly, pressure for these bodies to
occupy their given place in society, with, for example, the Labour Party
becoming “simply an alternative government in the present system- the
country needs a strong opposition”[^post-31-3] (and of course it is
striking how much this claim was used, even in the election campaign
itself by Labour MPs against Corbyn and against a conception of a Party
that exceeds its allocated place by contact with popular demands and
pressures); thirdly, through the advancing of sectional interest and
acceptance of the allocated social place, that the acceptance of
“limitation of aims may lead to important short-run gains” means that
“the men within these institutions who accept the limitation often make
more immediate sense” (my emphasis) [^post-31-4].

These set of conceptions, a development and modification of the more
optimistic evaluation in Culture and Society[^post-31-5], were a crucial
foundation for Williams’s analysis of two forms of social democracy in
*[The May Day
Manifesto](https://www.lwbooks.co.uk/sites/default/files/free-book/Mayday.pdf)*
(while a collaborative document, Williams was the main editor and the
analysis and concerns here are entirely of a piece with his thought) and
two forms of reformism in “Notes on Marxism in Britain since 1945”
[^post-31-6]. They also parallel, and in some cases influenced, a set of
arguments, although with crucial differences of emphasis, which further
help grasp the manifesto, in George Padmore, Perry Anderson, E. P.
Thompson and Hilary Wainwright.

What is crucial in Padmore’s 1944 essay, [“Imperialism: The Basis of
Labour Party
Crisis”](https://www.marxists.org/archive/padmore/1944/labour-crisis.htm),
is that he already identifies the crisis of Labour as that between
incorporation and the development of socialist values. For Padmore, the
essential contradiction is determined by imperialism and is between the
Trade Union leadership, and the majority of Labour MPs, who essentially
represent Trade Union consciousness in Parliament and a smaller group of
socialist MPs and intellectuals. Trade Union consciousness is
essentially partial, sectional and, ultimately, concerned mostly with a
fight over the spoils of imperialism,

> Since the reforms desired by the Labour leaders for the working-class
> in the metropolis derives from the spoils of Empire, these Trade Union
> leaders have, willy-nilly, been forced into the role of junior
> partners in the imperialist concern. They conclude that without the
> tribute from the Empire they will be unable to obtain those
> concessions, except they are prepared to challenge openly the whole
> fundamental basis of British Capitalist-Imperialism.

Subordination then, though qualified by meaningful but minor victories
over the distribution of imperialism’s spoils, is again part of having
no autonomous values. This is in contrast with the socialist wing of the
Party who aim at both international solidarity and transforming the
Party into the “instrument for bringing about a fundamental
transformation of the existing social order”, and for Padmore the two
are necessarily linked, in accordance with a different system of values.
Two more points from Padmore are crucial to understanding Labour’s
current situation; firstly, that labourist consciousness involves a
substitution of the interests of a privileged section of the working
class, the labour aristocracy or bourgeois proletariat, for the
interests of the working class as a whole; secondly, that the
contradictions of capitalism, imperialism and the state are not only, or
even mainly, between the Labour Party and working class,
anti-imperialist and popular forces but become internal to the Party
itself.

The question of the inability to generate values is posed slightly
differently by Perry Anderson in his 1964 essay, [“Origins of the
Present
Crisis”](https://newleftreview.org/I/23/perry-anderson-origins-of-the-present-crisis).
Anderson’s formulation of the difference between corporate and hegemonic
consciousness is also useful to the analysis of the manifesto, but needs
to be corrected following E. P. Thompson’s critique of Anderson in
[“Peculiarities of the
English”](https://www.marxists.org/archive/thompson-ep/1965/english.htm).
For Anderson, the English working class since at least the 19th century
has been characterised by a stolid and immovable corporate rather than
hegemonic class consciousness and this explains the immobile reformism
of the Labour Party. For Anderson,

> If a hegemonic class can be defined as one which imposes its own ends
> and its own vision on society as a whole, a corporate class is
> conversely one which pursues its own ends within a social totality
> whose global determination lies outside it. A hegemonic class seeks to
> transform society in its own image, inventing afresh its economic
> system, its political institutions, its cultural values, its whole
> ‘mode of insertion’ into the world. A corporate class seeks to defend
> and improve its own position within a social order accepted as given.

E. P. Thompson, in his polemic against Anderson in “The Peculiarities of
the English”, suggests that Anderson’s argument is both contemptuous of
real historical specifics and represents, at best, a vulgarisation of
Gramsci, at worse, a mere pretentious translation of the mechanical and
moralistic opposition between reformist and revolutionary socialism into
Gramcian terms. Following Thompson, but also making use of Anderson, it
may be useful to refine Anderson’s argument to use “corporate” to
describe the particular form of class consciousness that sustains
labourism, but to maintain that labourism is not exhaustive of the
organised, institutionalised working class in Britain. This would allow
the location of a possibility of a hegemonic project with a long horizon
at the very edge of reformism (this would also amount to a more
productive use of Gramsci), as suggested by Thompson’s slogan “reformist
tactics within a revolutionary strategy” (Thompson was also one of the
editors of *The May Day Manifesto* and this also overlaps with the
analysis of social democracy).

The critique of the opposition between reformism and revolution, which
opens up a potentially productive space on the boundary between the two,
is also made by Hilary Wainwright, who argues for the need of a strategy
beyond one which “simply oscillate\[s\] between rhetorical repetition of
the need to smash the bourgeois state and a policy of piecemeal demands
for bits of social welfare, the proverbial crumbs from the rich man’s
table” in *Beyond the Fragments*[^post-31-7]. In *A Tale of Two
Parties*, Wainwright further develops a critique of labourism rooted
both in the theoretical works discussed above and in socialist feminist
experience, which argues that labourism is a subordinate ideology. As
such, it is unable to generate new values and patterns of its own,
“lacking its own positive perspective for reorganising the economy and
transforming the state” [^post-31-8]. Labourism is essentially
economistic, ignoring everyday life, and acceps the sharp split between
the economy as a field for sectional activity of the Trade Unions, and
politics as a sphere for bureacratic-Fabian style management with both
only being concerned with the distribution of wealth [^post-31-9].

Wainwright opposes labourism to what she calls an economics of need,
which represents “a whole politics of production”, which goes beyond
concerns over distribution and the split between politics and the
economy and the exclusion of the community and everyday life. The
economics of need, unlike labourism which, as the political expression
of the privileged section of the working class, tended to accept a
racist and sexist stratification, the economics of need is also deeply
concerned with “the division of labour, its sexual and racial roots as
well as its basis in class power”[^post-31-10]. Wainwright’s critique of
labourism also includes a critique of the incorporation of the working
class into the state not only through sectionalism, the managing of
contradictions internal to the working class and the winning of limited
victories over distribution of wealth, but also through a lack of
democracy within the Labour Party, which further incorporates the
working class and other popular forces in a subordinate way
[^post-31-11]. Wainwright’s title, *A Tale of Two Parties*, further
suggests that social contradictions are internalised within Labour.

New Values or Mildness (or both)
--------------------------------

Labour’s manifesto, *[For the Many not the
Few](http://www.labour.org.uk/page/-/Images/manifesto-2017/labour-manifesto-2017.pdf)*,
is both an extremely radical break with consensus, expressing and
putting forward new values, and rather a mild document- rooted in common
sense. There is no contradiction here, or, rather, the contradiction
expresses the current condition. A useful, because entirely typical,
example of stressing only the mild, common-sensical character of the
manifesto, came from [Owen
Jones](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/may/16/labour-manifesto-left-election-social-democracy),
for Jones, “Labour’s manifesto...is a moderate common sense set of
antidotes to big problems holding back one of the wealthiest countries
on earth.” Jones, although he couldn’t bring himself to mention Corbyn
by name, at least praised the manifesto, unlike many “soft left” MPs who
could not bring themselves to do so, or still worse, other MPs on the
right of the Party who happily attacked it. It is [worth
remembering](https://newsocialist.org.uk/a-vow-of-silence-a-chronicle-of/)
that at the time the manifesto was released the vast majority of the PLP
were unenthusiastic and, despite there being significant compromises
with the right on immigration and defence, wanted Corbyn and the left to
“own” the manifesto, presuming that a heavy defeat would see the left
crushed.

The political agenda of those who did praise the manifesto but stressed
only its moderation, on an immediate level should be clear. It was , by
denying the struggle for new values, to marginalise Corbyn and the Left,
who made such a manifesto possible, and instead suggest, through its
rootedness in common sense, that anyone could have made it happen. With
Jones and a particular type of media leftism, there is also an
intersection of the personal and the political, in the last instance,
Jones does not want to seem odd, and the expression of radical, new
values against the grain can be odd. This in many ways is the basis for
Jones’s political-journalistic practice - this is not to say he’s a
hypocrite, the integration is sincere. To insist that the manifesto is
common-sensical is not wholly a bad thing, “[it’s sensible, anyone can
understand it. It’s
easy](http://thecahokian.blogspot.com.es/2013/07/bertolt-brecht-in-praise-of-communism.html)”.
However, the anyone is not literally anyone, but a member of the
struggling oppressed classes, the people, “You’re not an exploiter so
you can grasp it. It’s a good thing for you to find out more about it.”
The anyone is quite precisely not the soft left section of the PLP.

It does have to be understood that the manifesto is rooted in existing
common sense, but that being rooted in it while asserting radical values
works on commmon sense, helping push it towards something like Gramsci’s
“good sense”. As Gramsci argues, “common sense is an ambiguous,
contradictory and multiform concept...to refer to it as a confirmation
of truth is a nonsense”[^post-31-12]. The manifesto expresses a radical
break in values towards those of solidarity, co-operation and the
efficient, democratically controlled satisfaction of human needs.
Without grasping the creative break in values- and it is a creative
break, not only “an antidote to \[existing\] big problems” but a basis
for transformation, socialism becomes either technocratic or slips into
a passive cult of spontaneity [^post-31-13]. This means that it aims
less at the reorganisation of society based on the alternative values
and patterns of social organisation rooted in the struggles and
experiences of the oppressed, and more at a better distribution of
resources to certain sections of the working class either through
technocracy or limited forms of pressure by powerful and privileged
sections of the working class. Without an insistence on the creative
power of the people, there is a risk of reincorporation, of merely
reproducing what is imagined as an immediate working class position,
derived from opinion polling. This overlaps again with certain labourist
tendencies and can be seen particularly in some of Paul Mason’s
unhelpful interventions on security, foreign policy and immigration.
This further overlaps with a labourist tendency in its technocratic
presumption of the benignity of the state.

Two Forms of Social Democracy or Two Forms of Reformism.
--------------------------------------------------------

The contradiction between the manifesto (and campaign) as an expression
of new values, of a creative break with consensus, and the manifesto as
a mild document, can further be understood by a return to Williams, in
this case his conception of two forms of social democracy in *The May
Day Manifesto* and two forms of reformism in “Notes on Marxism in
Britain since 1945”. It is fairly clear that the manifesto is some sort
of social democratic and reformist document, for good or bad, but this
only gets us so far. The question is what sort of social democratic and
reformist document the manifesto is and what implications that has for
building on it. It is also important to note, that, as [Tony Benn
argues](http://www.unz.org/Pub/MarxismToday-1985jan-00012), at least on
the level of the institutions of the state in the widest possible sense
(which is the sense that is necessary), “the argument about revolution
versus reform is almost irrelevant in that we haven't even had reform in
Britain.”

In The *May Day Manifesto* ([pp.
165-70](https://www.lwbooks.co.uk/sites/default/files/free-book/Mayday.pdf)),
the distinction is made between two types of social democracy. One type
of social democracy is summarised as, “the gradual assimilation of
socialism to the forms of the society which it began by opposing”. This
clearly parallels the idea of integration and the consequent inability
to generate and institutionalise alternative values in the moral crisis
of the labour movement described in The Long Revolution. A further
development of The Long Revolution argument in The May Day Manifesto, is
around the awareness of the forms of limitation and fragmentation
involved in the Labour Party, as an expression of this meaning of
democracy, slotting into its allocated social place and, consequently,
limiting its ties with those social forces and the locations that would
enable the generation of alternative values. Under this meaning of
social democracy, Parliament is centred as the only place of genuine
politics, and “parliamentary democracy” insisted on as an abstract
commitment (again it is striking to note how much criticism of a broadly
Burkean sort there has been of Corbyn, Momentum and particularly demands
for MPs to be accountable to the Party grassroots) leading to the Party
becoming a purely electoral machine in which members are integrated as
volunteers with no democratic control.

A further result of parliamentarianism in this version of social
democracy is a closing down of relations with the radical,
extra-parliamentary left with the result that slowly a “social
democratic party can reach the point where associations to the right
seem natural; associations to the left impossible. As in Britain, it can
seem much more shocking, to a good Labour man, to be found talking or
working with a Communist than with a Tory; and this, at least, is no
longer an abstract preference; it has the regularity of practice.” The
fragmentation theme is further developed elsewhere in *The May Day
Manifesto* around the question of social movements and Wilsonian
modernising technocracy, with the argument that Labour’s integration
into an inhuman system also involved the ability of a modernising,
technocratic rhetoric to co-opt humane hopes and alternative purposes
generated outside Labour ([pp.
39-41](https://www.lwbooks.co.uk/sites/default/files/free-book/Mayday.pdf)).
In the background here is an argument taken up in a slightly different
way in *Beyond the Fragments* that social movement practice is often
grounded in a form of fragmentation rooted in the division of labour
that renders it difficult to generalise the struggles of social
movements (to go beyond the fragments). In the May Day Manifeso this is
extended to the argument that there is a hidden affinity with
technocracy in social movements in that technocracy also, rooted in the
division of labour, avoids a totalising perspective that locates the
common enemy of all human hopes and treats problems as discreetly
solvable. This explains, to a large extent, for Williams, Hall and
Thompson how Wilsonian modernisation could make use of both the members
and rhetoric of the peace movement while neutralising their charge.

The other meaning of social democracy, which offers substantially more
of an opening, is largely articulated negatively by contrast with the
integration into existing patterns in a subordinate role and exclusive
parliamentarianism of the first meaning. The explanation is also,
significantly, for how Williams describes the two forms of reformism,
presented through an analysis of its situation. Williams describes this
form of social democracy as, “that form of socialist struggle which is
available as a serious option in societies which have relatively open
democratic institutions and the necessary freedoms to use them.” These
open democratic institutions include Parliament, open in the sense of
free elections, but not usable on its own for serious social
transformation and perhaps barely usable at all in its current form. A
central theme of *The May Day Manifesto* is an attempt to challenge “the
politics of the new capitalism”. When it comes to Parliament, the new
capitalism involves a limitation, in various ways, of its power as a
popular and representative institution and the integration of the Labour
Party and its members through the Pary’s anti-democratic structure, and
even the working-class, in some ways, as a whole.

Drawing on *The May Day Manifesto*, therefore, a number of points are
key to pushing the stronger meaning of social democracy; firstly, the
democratic reform of Labour, so it no longer confronts its members as an
inhuman apparatus; secondly, the development and nurturing of
alternative sources of social power to challenge what could be called
the extra-parliamentary power of the ruling class; thirdly, the winning
of power in Parliament, this does matter, but by itself it is clearly
insufficient, Even winning a large majority for a socialist programme in
elections would be, by itself, not enough, and would further contribute
to integration into existing social organisations, whether through the
achievement of limited victories or through the defeat of such a
programme through capital’s extra-parliamentary power.

This brings us to a crucial point concerning Labour’s manifesto; in many
ways the struggle for the stronger form of social democracy, which in
existing society, whether of the late 1960s or today, is the plausible
form of struggle, is not about programmes, but between developing
plausible institutionalised forces. As the chapter concludes,

> It is not simply a question of programmes and ideologies: these can be
> argued about, endlessly, in the party press and at party
> conferences...It is primarily a question of institutions, for what is
> needed by the system is an intermittently available and in that sense
> efficient electoral machine, which by traditional inertia is still
> called a party but which must by no means become a serious political
> party in the sense of posing an alternative organization and campaign.
> If the party becomes real, as a campaigning democratic institution, it
> is at once a focus of genuinely alternative power. On the other hand,
> if it is to be a still mainly voluntary electoral machine, to what
> extent can it be emptied of a real political programme, which its
> members take seriously and expect, after their work, to be carried
> through?

Williams’s discussion of two forms of reformism in many ways maps on
this disctinction but with crucial and necessary refinements for today
because of his more explicit consideration of the place of analysis of
situations, the need to build up and sharpen popular demands and
organisation and the theme of integration, no longer through meaningful
if non-revolutionary victories, but through defeat. For Williams, using
the crucial insight that wider social contradictions are internalised
within Labour, and particularly the Labour Left, there are two forms of
reformism,

> We can come to see the contradiction, within the Labour Left and
> allies, between reform as response, which is necessarily a process of
> new popular mobilization and organization and reform as
> representation, in which the political formation in alliance and
> coalition with others, pursues its percentage within the
> system.[^post-31-14]

Fabianism in Williams’s account is the main type of representative
reformism on the state level, and there are parallels with Padmore’s
argument before and Wainwright’s after of the slotting into an
appropriate and subordinate place within the existing structure, and
therefore becoming part of the reproduction of that structure, in order
to struggle for better distribution. Writing in 1976, Williams also
notes a change in the basis for the integration: in *The Long
Revolution*, the integration, and with it the moral decay of the labour
movement, was to a large extent achieved through winning meaningful if
non-radical victories. By the mid 1970s, by contrast, “the price of full
incorporation (the capitalist version of reformism) is increasingly too
high for the system to pay, and where any new incorporation must include
the substance of actual defeat of major sections of the working class.”
[^post-31-15]

The second form of reformism, reformism as response, has more productive
possibilities and, essentially, drives beyond itself, refusing
incorporation and politics’s limited allocated social place. Central to
a reformism as response is a centring of popular needs and demands that,
through various processes, including the way these transform existing
organisations and necessitate new ones, become total so that “one
struggle connects with and implies another, and there is then a process
of putting the central system under strains which can lead to
transformation.” [^post-31-16] A further significant point both that
needs to be considered about reformism as response, and which Williams
makes against dogmatic, moralising “revolutionary” positions, is that
they tend to lead to “internal exile”. A plausible left politics needs,
to a certain extent, to be able to deliver immediate victories, even if
those entail compromises, whether with institutions, processes or common
sense, which are intolerable from a purely revolutionary point of view.
It also needs to begin with popular and working class institutions as
they exist, “to adopt a theoretical position from which, for example,
the trade unions are seen as merely reformist, and the perceived
political Left is dismissed as incurably reformist, is to go into a very
dangerous kind of internal exile.” However, unlike the limited forms of
reformism, beginning with the situation as it is and the current balance
of forces,which crush the possibility of satisfying human needs and
enjoying human capabilities, reformism as response entails going beyond
them, “I can agree with those who say that all these formations have no
choice but to change their deeply learnt consensual perspectives or
accept comprehensive defeat.” [^post-31-17] Reformism as response or the
more positive meaning of social democracy, therefore, are always at the
point of, and the expression of a dangerous tension between being pulled
back into the existing power structure on the one hand, and outrunning
the current situation too fast in theory, and becoming irrelevant.

A Populism of Need
------------------

I want to suggest one further theoretical framework to understand what
is at stake in the manifesto, which has affinities with the better
meaning of social democracy and with reformism as response; and that is
the possibility of a populism of need. The notion of a populism of need
is derived to a large extent from Wainwright’s “economics of need” and
the way in which need operates in Williams’s analysis of reformism. It
is worth remembering that Corbyn’s so-called populist relaunch took
place in early January 2017, but it took until the election campaign for
a convincing left populism for Britain in 2017 to be articulated to any
degree. This, I want to argue, could be described as a populism of need,
and involves a very significant break with certain other mooted left
populisms, indeed perhaps such a break that we are not talking about a
populism anymore. However, Labour’s campaign and manifesto cannot be
described purely as a “populism of need”, there were also other, less
useful populist tendencies.

As Laclau and Mouffe argue, any radical politics requires “the
definition of an adversary. That is to say it requires the acceptance of
ineradicability of antagonism”[^post-31-18]. Within both the emerging
populism of need and the less useful left populisms, “the establishment”
has come to be named as the enemy. However, it is clear that “the
establishment” functions in radically different ways between the
populism of need and other left populisms. Within the less useful
populisms, “the establishment” functions mostly as a direct translation
of Podemos’s *la casta*. This translation involves, however, a whole set
of problems. Firstly, the idea of translation rests on a certain
formalism, that *la casta* can be wrenched out of the Spanish social,
economic, cultural and political context and unproblematically inserted
into a British context. Secondly, related to this, is the very limited
notion of the discursive (a more limited notion of Laclau and Mouffe’s
“the social conceived as a discursive space"[^post-31-19]). This led to
a number of arguments against the language of the kinder, gentler
politics in favour of [“heads on
sticks”](http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/staggers/2017/03/labour-should-ditch-kinder-gentler-politics-it-needs-heads-sticks)
language, often underpinned by an odd fetishism of Bernie Sanders, whose
political platform, “was decisively to the right of Corbyn, but using
rhetoric which sounded, if anything, more left wing. Sanders confronted
his audiences with unabashed class politics, hammering the economic
elites.” Here, language becomes radically separated from its context, it
becomes a trick merely for winning office, with no consideration either
of the content it refers to or consideration of how having tricked our
way into office, we could exercise power. As *The May Day Manifesto*
argues, a significant Parliamentary majority for a socialist programme
is probably necessary but it is by no means sufficient. Moreover, by
rendering (electoral) politics autonomous (a further basis of the
possibility of translation whether of Sanders or Podemos into the
British context) there is no consideration not only of building the
popular power necessary to govern usefully on a left programme, but also
to be useful if we are not in office. The formalism, the tendency to be
beyond left and right, in an anti-establishment populism, also, in
allowing Corbynism to be linked to Trump and Brexit, opens up space for
opportunism and moral (and ultimately political) failings around
immigration and the state more generally, policing, security,
imperialism with reactionary positions on these held to somehow
represent the popular will against a “liberal” establishment.

What unites a bad left (even a bad beyond left or right) populism is,
ultimately, that the people remain passive, to be represented broadly
within the existing system. Underneath this is the failure to ever
articulate the people positively; in their passivity the people have no
positive or active existence, they are merely the ‘not establishment’.
Allied to this is an implicit link between a limited notion of politics
identified with the discursive that renders politics, and a “rigged
politics”, as the point where the establishment operates, tending to
abstract it from the wider social, economic and cultural context.

A populism of need, which is largely, but not exclusively as there have
been slips back, what the leadership and movement began to articulate
during the election campaign, and which the manifesto was a significant
part, is a major break with these tendencies. Most significantly, it
begins not with the naming of the enemy, but with the people in their
needs, demands and capabilities. It is the non satisfaction of these
needs that allows the grasp of the totality on a systematic level,the
common enemy of all human hopes. It is only then that the establishment
is grasped as those forces and interests which benefit from this system
and seek to maintain it. This notion of the establishment is more
systematic and goes beyond a merely autonomous politics to grasp its
operation at all points of society.

The antagonism constituted by the inability of the system to satisfy
popular needs is the basis for the proper articulation of the crucial
but much maligned “kinder, gentler politics”. Kindness here also serves
to denaturalise, to make what was taken for granted appear strange and
wrong, for Brecht,

> The more there are suffering, then, the more natural their sufferings
> appear. Who wants to prevent the fishes in the sea from getting wet?
> And the suffering themselves share this callousness towards themselves
> and are lacking in kindess towards themselves. It is terrible that
> human beings so easily put up with existing conditions, not only with
> the sufferings of strangers but also with their own. All those who
> have thought about the bad state of things refuse to appeal to the
> compassion of one group of people for another. But the compassion of
> the oppressed for the oppressed is indispensable. It is the world’s
> one hope.[^post-31-20]

Here the kinder, gentler politics, and the refusal of meekness
([\#WeDemand](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=28-fC6_Byu0)) throughout
the campaign, both of which are rooted in grasping the non-satisfaction
of needs, come together. In this contradiction between the satisfaction
of human needs and a system along with the forces and interests that
uphold it, what is considered political and able to be challenged is
expanded to cut right across society, including across the Labour Party,
and entails not forms of passivity but of activity and participation in
the transformation of society. Moreover, as in reformism as response,
the struggle over needs is not a struggle for discreet things that can
be met through current institutions, it rapidly pushes beyond itself and
becomes total.

Labour, reconstituted as the institutionalisation of the compassion of
the oppressed for the oppressed, not as an essentially top-down body to
which the oppressed appeal for help, is able to grasp and challenge in
theory and in practice the totality of social relations. This is the
basis for the aggressive side of populism, which is also required, but
without this radical kindness, however, the naming of the enemy becomes
abstract, macho and boring in a deep structural way, where anger covers
the triviality of separating politics from everyday life.

The Manifesto
-------------

What may seem a long, theoretical diversion now gives us the necessary
basis to grasp the manifesto and how to make use of it. The first point
to grasp is that, in the last instance, the manifesto must be grasped as
a totality, even as a totality against some of the policies contained
within it, and a totality that embodies a radical break with the
dominant system of values. Part of grasping the radicalism of the
manifesto, which many in the PLP now wish to hide, is to remember how
few could bring themselves to praise it, and how critical many were. One
criticism, however, which expresses, inadvertently, a starting point, is
the claim by an anonymous coward in the PLP that the manifesto was, like
[“a ten year old’s letter to Santa
Claus”](http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2017/05/11/labour-mps-reject-jeremy-corbyns-manifesto-theresa-may-warns/).
The manifesto very significantly does compile a set of demands made by
various activist groups, here it represents a significant break from a
top-down labourism that doesn’t listen - [John McDonnell’s closeness to
DPAC](https://dpac.uk.net/2016/09/john-mcdonnell-mp-speech-at-dpac-conference-sept-10th-2016/)
is exemplary here. The point, however, is that these demands exist
within the wider frameworks around popular needs that gives a total
character, and challenges Labour’s integration into an austerity
framework which is the basis to treat demands as unrealistic. A related
point, emphasising the need to relate different forms of struggle is
made Wainwright in *Beyond the Fragments*, &gt; Without incessant
argument for an alternative which meets the needs of all oppressed and
exploited groups, trade unionists in the private sector will see our
demands for more social expenditure as a threat to their jobs; council
house tenants will see our demands as competition for scarce resources,
and so on.[^post-31-21]

The manifesto, therefore, is not a fragmented list of demands, they
cohere around a general challenge to the organisation of society, This
also means that an attempt to recuperate parts of the manifesto, whether
through a flailing Tory government and/or the Labour right must be
resisted. For the manifesto’s radicalism it is necessary to remember
that the majority of the PLP could not bring themselves to praise it
when it came out, it is also significant that a large number of those
who did praise it, did not praise it as a whole but only praised
individual policies without addressing the wider context of values. This
deliberate fragmentation is a basis for attempts to rearticulate the
manifesto into existing patterns while leaving them broadly unchanged,
what it aims to efface is the link, as discussed in different ways by
Williams, Wainwright and Laclau and Mouffe between new values and
antagonism. In Wainwright, for example, the new socialist politics of
production, when it comes to class conflict goes beyond “Labourism’s
assumption of a clash between sectional interests. It embodies a clash
of principles for organising the economy: the principle of accumulation
for private or at any rate unaccountable profit, versus the belief in
production for democratically decided need”[^post-31-22]. For Laclau and
Mouffe, the dominance of neoliberalism has led to the left broadly
accepting a position which implies, “politics is no longer structured
around social divisions and that political problems have become merely
technical”[^post-31-23]. This maintenance of this incorporation of
Labour without the risk of new values rooted in antagonism, which
Corbynism has significantly challenged, is what is entailed by this
position on the manifesto. One example of a manifesto commitment that
makes this tension clear is the pledge to regulate Fixed Odds Betting
Terminals ([p.
88](http://www.labour.org.uk/page/-/Images/manifesto-2017/labour-manifesto-2017.pdf);
within the manifesto as a whole this functions as a sensible, softly
anti-capitalist policy that gains strength from its relation to other
themes, and the totality of the manifesto. However, equally, it could be
disarticulated and integrated within a Blue Labour type framework of a
politics of the “respectable” working class that is at best
old-fashioned and nostalgic, and worst actively oppressive.

A commonplace that is not entirely untrue, but needs significant
clarification, is the claim that people don’t vote based on manifestos.
Whilst it is certainly true that very few voters read the whole
document, [as a number
of](https://newsocialist.org.uk/reflections-from-wales/) [our pieces
which
discuss](https://newsocialist.org.uk/on-the-croydon-central-campaign/)
[campaigning in this election
show](https://newsocialist.org.uk/the-red-tide-hits-chingford/), the
manifesto had a significant impact, especially in contrast to the Tory
manifesto. Indeed, if anything whilst there may have been some headline
policies that caught the public attention, it was much more a question
of a general impression of the spirit of the manifesto, rooted in the
values expressed, its refusal of meekness and its populism rooted in
kindness, which suggests staying loyal to the manifesto and its
electoral impact requires a stronger, more coherent articulation of
those values in future policies and actions.

After the election, the manifesto poses its own questions within what
could be described as a hegemonic crisis, with the perceived legitimacy
of the values of the dominant consensus breaking down along with the
integration of political parties into it. To a large extent this can be
seen in the collapse of a particular articulation of Red Toryism, which
at first appeared deeply threatening to Labour’s prospects. The purchase
of this articulation broke down rapidly under scrutiny, partially
because of how little this configuration is able to offer the working
class, partially by contrast with Labour’s bold addressing of material
needs. Claims by [Greening, Hunt and
Green](https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jul/01/top-tories-revolt-against-may-public-spending)
around the relaxing of austerity or reconsidering tuition fees can be
read within a similar framework, of aiming (though it is probably too
late for the Tories now) to fragment the Labour programme and support
base by integrating certain of its features into a right-wing programme.

This hegemonic crisis, further reworks the contradictions within Labour,
because just as, on the one hand, certain themes could be disarticulated
from their radical totality; on the other hand, it is also possible that
significant sections of the Labour Right, now the electoral plausbility
of such a programme has been demonstrated to them, could be swung behind
a genuinely left programme, particularly with their union and party
grassroots base. Indeed, ironically, now, after the left, whether in the
leadership or at the base, generated and defended new values (with
labourism structurally unable to do so) while facing considerable
hostility and ridicule; the manifesto is in many ways more a document of
the more imaginative part of the Labour Right than the Left. This is
suggested by the fact that many on the Labour Right are now keen to
accept redistribution and large-scale. investment to address the glaring
spatial contradictions of the UK, as well as their views chiming with
the manifesto’s conservative stance on immigration (largely), the police
and defence. That the manifesto is now, though not before the election,
more a document of the Old Labour Right than the Left suggests two
things; both how quickly, at least in a hegemonic crisis, radical
positions can gain purchase; secondly, that there are points that need
to be pushed further and this requires, both in policy and party
structure, facing down demands to compromise.

[Yesterday's intervention by Tom
Watson](https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jul/01/tom-watson-labour-can-be-unbeatable)
is significant here, though how far Watson is intentionally attempting
to hobble left advance, how far an apparatus rooted in over 150 years of
British class politics, going back beyond even Labour’s foundation, is
working its sorry way through him, is unclear. Watson praises the
performance in the election and the programme, including the way it
widening politicisation and discussion of issues. However, he demands,
rooted in the construction of a particular “traditional working class
voter” (a construction of class that as both
[Marie](https://newsocialist.org.uk/women-voting-labour/) and
[Geraghty](https://newsocialist.org.uk/corbyns-emerging-class-coalition/)
have shown is lacking) “greater reassurance” over “policing” and
security”. What is striking here is both the denial (a denial rooted in
how these parts of the manifesto violated its spirit) of how much the
leadership compromised on policing and security and the link between
addressing the interests of a particular class faction (which stands in
for the working class as a whole) and fixing the programme in a
subordinate position. This fixing of the programme in subordination is
further emphasised by the continuing trope of electability and Watson’s
hypocritical give me party democracy but not yet.

Evaluating the Manifesto
------------------------

Whilst the manifesto needs to be understood in its relation to its total
conception, it is also useful to break down certain policies in
reference to the strength of their expression of necessary values.
Rather schematically, but hopefully productively, I would suggest that
it is possible to break the manifesto down into five categories;
firstly, policies which are unambiguously good; secondly, policies which
represent a significant and positive break with the current state of
things but which need extending, radicalising or developing; thirdly,
and perhaps most interestingly, policies which are, at present,
underdeveloped and ambiguous and could either be developed in a radical
or in a technocratic direction; fourthly, policies which are ambiguous,
but largely reconciled badly; and fifthly, policies which must be
opposed unconditionally. A second set of questions, still being
articulated largely on the level of the programme, is how do policies
relate to each other and the existing balance of social forces, and if
they entail acquiescence in certain areas, does that limit the
possibility of enacting policies in other areas.

1. Abolition of Tuition Fees and The Work Capability Assesment
--------------------------------------------------------------

A large number of manifesto policies are entirely good, in many ways
there is the least to say about these. These policies include, for
example, the abolition of the Work Capability Assessment ([p.
57](http://www.labour.org.uk/page/-/Images/manifesto-2017/labour-manifesto-2017.pdf))
(an important instance of listening to popular demands) or of tuition
fees ([p.
43](http://www.labour.org.uk/page/-/Images/manifesto-2017/labour-manifesto-2017.pdf)).
In many ways these policies demand the least strategic analysis, mostly
the question is to defend them. However, to think about needs and
pushing beyond mere representative reform, questions can be posed;
firstly, about how universalism takes proper account of needs, for
example with the Winter Fuel Payment, it is reasonable to argue that
even the richest pensioner has an additional need for heating that
should be socially met. The question of whether universalism is
regressive or progressive is largely determined by the way it is funded,
which introduces the question of Labour’s taxation policy (see below).
Secondly, there is a question whether policy victories in these areas
can provide the basis for further radicalism, for example, how far does
the egalitarian, needs based ethos of abolishing tuition fees open up
wider questions of the function of universities and the possibility of
their disintegration from capitalist purposes more generally.

2. Economic and Investment Policies
-----------------------------------

The second category is policies that are positive, and represent a
significant break with the dominant social organisation, but which need
to be further radicalised; many of the manifesto’s economic policies are
in this category. Taxation policy ([p.
9](http://www.labour.org.uk/page/-/Images/manifesto-2017/labour-manifesto-2017.pdf))
is one example here, conceptually the break from fetishising income and
corporation tax rates and, consequently, increasing more regressive
taxes like VAT and National Insurance, is entirely positive and some of
the specific taxes like using VAT on private school fees ([p.
38](http://www.labour.org.uk/page/-/Images/manifesto-2017/labour-manifesto-2017.pdf))
or health insurance to pay for free school meals or free hospital car
parking ensure that the needs met through universal policies were to be
met in progressive ways. The question here is whether there could be a
more radical reworking of the tax system and also demands an
investigation into how much redistribution through tax and spending
policies is possible. The other significant area, which we at *New
Socialist* have [began to
address](https://newsocialist.org.uk/labours-alternative-models-of-ownership-report/),
is in the nationalisation and investment proposals and around what would
be “[Full
Corbynism](https://newsocialist.org.uk/full-corbynism-constructing-a-new-left-political-economy-beyond-neoliberalism/)”
in economic policy. This, perhaps more than any other area, requires
significant further work, including, as Joe Guinan and Thomas Hanna’s
essay begins to address, considering the possibilities of politically
implementing such a set of policies, as they argue,

> Without wishing to be alarmist, it’s increasingly evident that a high
> price will be exacted from any left government with the temerity to
> pursue serious departures from the status quo. ‘The roof will fall
> in’, warns Ray McAnally as radical Labour Prime Minister Harry Perkins
> in *A Very British Coup*. Capital flight, investment strikes, foreign
> exchange crises, trade retaliation – all are possible, whether as
> market reactions or deliberately administered punishment beatings.

3. Values against Technocratic Modernisation in Childcare and Constitutional Reform
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Within this system of evaluation, the most interesting policy are those
which are underdeveloped and, thus, still open to struggle. If the
political context were different, it would perhaps be possible to put
the nationalisation programmes into this section, especially as
Williams, in his distinction between reformism as response and reformism
as representation, centres nationalisation

> Where the Fabian procedure of the public board has been at best
> “representative” reform...The workers’ control movement...has been the
> most significant response within both the social democratic and
> Marxist traditions, to what is otherwise a clearly barren (because
> from the beginning partial and subordinate) reformism.[^post-31-24]

However, in the current situation, even if it must be gone beyond, even
a Fabian style nationalisation would represent a significant break with
existing values. The question largely with these policies is whether
they are the basis for reforms through efficiency and modernisation,
within the organisation of society as it is now, with perhaps
significant but limited extensions of entitlements, or whether they can
be worked through on the basis of alternative values going beyond a
fragmented integration that slots into its socially prescribed place and
cannot interlock with other struggles.

There are a number of policy areas in the manifesto where this openness
exists, two of the most interesting are childcare and constitutional
reform. Childcare will be handled relatively briefly here as much of
what is at stake was discussed in our *Alternative Models of Ownership*
[report](https://newsocialist.org.uk/labours-alternative-models-of-ownership-report/).
One possible reading of the childcare section of the manifesto ([p.
35](http://www.labour.org.uk/page/-/Images/manifesto-2017/labour-manifesto-2017.pdf))
is that what is on offer is essentially better resourced childcare with
extensions of entitlements. This clearly would represent a significant,
if not qualitative, improvement on the current situation. However, this
notion of childcare would still be operating within a particular form of
integration of parents, particularly mothers, and their children into
the purposes of the state and capitalism, with both parents and
childcare workers lacking control over the provision. What, following
Wainwright’s critique of labourist economics, and drawing on Robin
Murray[^post-31-25], remains is still essentially a black box model,
where there is little interest in the content and control of the
childcare, this is instead determined by the needs of the state and
capital around maternal employment and beginning the socialisation of
children for work. Whilst this version of Labour’s proposals would
represent an improvement, we should not be limiting our vision to this.
An alternative as suggested in *New Socialist’s*
[essay](https://newsocialist.org.uk/labours-alternative-models-of-ownership-report/),
to push for forms that are democratically controlled and initiated and,
instead of being determined by the needs of the state and capital,
determined by the needs and plans of those who rely on childcare. The
integration of these forms of childcare would be with the daily lives of
parents, particularly mothers, and involve a transformed content
suggestive of different social patterns and relations of production and
reproduction.

A second crucial area where again the question is of the pressure for
new values and a radically altered content, in this case against a
liberal formalism, is around constitutional reform. The manifesto
promises,

> A Labour government will establish a Constitutional Convention to
> examine and advise on reforming of the way Britain works at a
> fundamental level. We will consult on its form and terms of reference
> and invite recommendations on extending democracy. This is about where
> power and sovereignty lies – in politics, the economy, the justice
> system, and in our communities. The Convention will look at extending
> democracy locally, regionally and nationally, considering the option
> of a more federalised country.([p.
> 102](http://www.labour.org.uk/page/-/Images/manifesto-2017/labour-manifesto-2017.pdf))

On a political level, a serious set of proposals on constitutional
reform have considerable potential in pulling away sections of Liberal
Democrat, Plaid Cymru and SNP support whilst also making the possibility
of a non-cynical, useful offer of a Parliamentary alliance with those
parties more possible.

The manifesto proposals on constitutional reform as they stand could be
read on liberal modernising terms, where Britain’s constitutional
arrangements are understood fairly narrowly and compared with an
imagined ideal form in which direction it is demanded that they are
changed. This is boring. It is boring because it is separated from any
content and any rooting in social relations or everyday life, it is one
of the reasons there has been no serious popular pressure for
constitutional reform in decades. Equally, this modernising approach
misses that the British bourgeoisie, such as it is, is no force for
constitutional reform, the current “pre-modern” form serves it very
well. Anderson’s line of argument in “[Origins of the Present
Crisis](https://newleftreview.org/I/23/perry-anderson-origins-of-the-present-crisis)”
is useful here, especially the function of imperialism in “setting”
British society, and his argument around constitutional arrangements
being grounded in how,

> Faced with the rise of the bourgeoisie and then of the proletariat,
> the hegemonic class had either to break with its whole tradition and
> try to maintain itself in exclusive power by military or bureaucratic
> coercion; or it had to yield entry into the political system to these
> new social forces, and neutralize their efficacy within it by powerful
> extra-parliamentary means, which were consonant with the whole
> strategic style of its past. Faced with the rise of the middle-class,
> it chose the latter, redoubling the specifically cultural and
> ideological dimension of hegemony (mystique of aristocracy, etc) and
> progressively dissolving its immediate opponent by selective
> co-optation to its own ranks. The new unified bloc then turned to
> contain the proletariat. There was no possibility of dissolving this
> as a class, but the incorporation of the industrial bourgeoisie into
> the dominant bloc supplied a substitute second weapon: the sheer
> strength of massed capital.

The second possible thinking of constitutional reform, by contrast, is
not a formalism, large parts are suggested by Benn’s “[Who Dares
Wins](http://www.unz.org/Pub/MarxismToday-1985jan-00012)”. Firstly, Benn
is critical of the lack of attention paid by the Labour movement to the
functioning of the state,

> One of the greatest failures of the British labour movement, which is
> one of the strongest and best in the world, is that throughout its
> history and even in its periods of parliamentary power, it has done
> practically nothing whatsoever to change power relationships in the
> state.

Benn’s analysis in contrast to the formalism and limited sense of the
constitution of typical reformers is rooted in an analysis of power and
the usability of institutions for left purposes. It involves an expanded
notion of what needs to be challenged to extend democracy, rooted in
social antagonisms that would involve a huge extension of people’s
control over all aspects of their lives. Politics is not autonomous and
formal in Benn. Thus for Benn, the crucial point is that the
institutions and practices of the British state are not our institutions
and not usable by us,

> If I have learned one lesson from a lifetime in politics, and a lot of
> it in what you would call the top of politics, it is that we cannot
> use the institutions and cultures devised by another class, in another
> period, for another purpose, to meet our needs in our age for our
> purposes and we have got to be more fundamental in our approach.

Benn itemises a whole set of practices and institutions. These begin
with unaccountable executive power grounded in royal prerogative,
operations of secrecy and, significantly, how these both shape and are
sustained by Labour’s lack of internal democracy, both in terms of
official procedures and culture with largely autonomous executive
functions privileged and a general dislike of accountability. Next Benn
discusses the role of the police, security services, the media, the
unaccountable power of senior civil servants, and the judiciary, all of
whom have become “naked instruments of class power”. Furthermore, Benn
considers the education system as a further set of institutions of class
power that are non-usable for socialist transformation ,and here Benn’s
analysis overlaps with Anderson’s considerations of public schools and
Oxbridge and how they meld a common ruling class hegemonic culture, as
well as *The May Day Manifesto’s* interests in the function of
comprehensive schooling integrated into capital and the state’s purposes
to stratify and produce a technocratic class ([p.
26-8](https://www.lwbooks.co.uk/sites/default/files/free-book/Mayday.pdf)).
Benn concludes his denunciation of the institutions of the British state
by discussing “an economic system that excludes any democratic control
whatever from those who work in private industry” and “institutionalised
sexism and racism throughout society and an artificially induced
nationalism built upon a fear and distrust that is deliberately
stimulated to inhibit - for political purposes - any action that might
correct it.”

Benn’s set of analyses is of its time, substantially impacted by the
role of the police, press and judiciary in the miners’ strike, and,
reworked today, may have slightly, but only slightly, different
emphases. I would suggest today what is required is a stronger sense of
the UK’s spatial contradictions (whether around economic, political or
cultural power) and a greater emphasis, although Benn does mention it,
of the racist character of certain state institutions, particularly and
not exclusively the police, and practices. What is key however in Benn
is his non-formalism; institutions and practices are evaluated in terms
of the social power they are rooted in and reproduce, the correct
challenge to which is a collective power to control our own lives. It’s
perhaps worth noting too the centrality of radical constitutional reform
in the name of exercising popular power to [Mélenchon’s Presidential
campaign](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2017/04/france-insoumise-melenchon-elections-sixth-republic-national-front/).

This non-formalism bears particularly on questions of devolution. Within
the liberal frame (but also sometimes within a revanchist, “English
Parliament” frame) the question is essentially posed in the abstract,
with no reference to effective popular powers, it is, as a result,
boring. The question of the UK’s spatial contradictions requires a
political devolution of power, but of a particular sort to mean that
effective powers can be exercised locally. This requires, for example, a
devolution agenda to intersect with a serious programme of
democratically controlled regional investment. It is worth noting, too,
how far these spatial contradictions are a product of imperialism.
[Anderson](https://newleftreview.org/I/23/perry-anderson-origins-of-the-present-crisis),
again, is useful on this, the external spatial contradictions of
imperialism produce internal spatial contradictions within the UK.

This is rather a theoretical frame for understanding what a left
constitutional reform would look like, but it should be clear that such
a reformism could not be formalist and has the capacity, precisely
because rooted in social contradictions around class, race and
geography, to bring in a larger section of people concerned with
exercising democratic control over all aspects of their lives than the
conventional interest in constitutional reform. It would also, in
expanding the notion of what is the subject of constitutional reform,
entail a radical change of emphasis, it is, for example, quite clear
that, for a genuinely left constitutional reformism, the question of
democratic, community control and accountability of the police is at
least, probably more, important than electoral reform.

4. Compromises with reaction on immigration and borders
-------------------------------------------------------

The next section of policies to consider is those that combine good and
bad aspects, but, largely, are reconciled in bad, or at least limiting
and limited, ways. Sometimes these policies are internally
contradictory, but more often the contradiction is between what
interests and voices are listened to and what emphasis they are given
within a reconciliation that is largely technocratic. The clearest
example of such a set of policies in the manifesto is on immigration.
The general framing, whilst not perfect, suggests a broadly humane set
of values, which is a radical break from the consensus around how
immigration is discussed, especially in a promise not to “denigrate”
migrant workers, the absolute refusal of scapegoating migrants and the
rejection of “bogus immigration targets.” ([p.
28](http://www.labour.org.uk/page/-/Images/manifesto-2017/labour-manifesto-2017.pdf))
There are other breaks with the current system that suggest migrant
groups have been listened to such as an end to indefinite detentions,
and a critique of the emerging system of “everyday borders”, that has
been highlighted and organised against by groups such as [Schools
ABC](https://www.schoolsabc.net/) and [Docs not
Cops](http://www.docsnotcops.co.uk/). In the manifesto, the
Conservatives are criticised for “want\[ing\] to turn private sector
landlords, teachers, medical staff and other public sector workers into
unpaid immigration officers, forcing them to provide information to the
authorities.” ([p.
78](http://www.labour.org.uk/page/-/Images/manifesto-2017/labour-manifesto-2017.pdf))

If this where all the manifesto had on immigration and borders it would
represent a limited but also, given the context, radical, break with
dominant values and policies. The promises would remain inadequate as
they stood, but also would be steps towards a more humane immigration
and border system. However, this is just one side of the manifesto,
other parts represent a compromise with, and even a capitulation to,
reactionary forces in and outside the Party, this partially causes the
limitedness of what is positive in the immigration section. Even more
tellingly, however, it is expressed in the border control section, which
is very much framed, despite the critique of everyday borders, through
Tory failures to take “control of our borders or strengthened our
national security” ([p.
78](http://www.labour.org.uk/page/-/Images/manifesto-2017/labour-manifesto-2017.pdf))
and the manifesto promises to recruit 500 more border guards. This is a
point where the voices being listened to are contradictory, on the one
hand migrant campaigners, on the other those “cold racists” who believe
that a tough stance on security and borders is necessary to maintain or
attract “working class” support. The reconciliation through a
rationalising, efficiency focused state-based policy- more border
guards, the border guard role of teachers, doctors, landlords removed-
is entirely coherent. In this move, as suggested by the analysis in *The
May Day Manifesto*, it offers a technocratic resolution that is able to
encompass social movement demands, but in a subordinate role, in a
synthesis where values are spirited away (and consequently ruling class
values taken for granted) in the name of efficiency.

A critique of the manifesto on immigration, an area where there are a
clear set of compromises at the very least, if not capitulations to the
Labour right, needs to involve a moral critique and a moral sense of
solidarity from those not immediately effected. However, it also needs
to grasp, at a certain point, that anti-immigrant feeling and policies
represent a barrier, as suggested by Benn, to socialist advance in
general. This is less a question of conceptualising through
“scapegoating”, which risks still foregrounding the non-migrant and
non-racialised section of the working class, presenting them as being
“distracted” from their true purpose by racist feeling and minimising
the short-term benefits accrued to some members of the working class
through an internal hierarchisation rooted in race. “Scapegoating” is,
essentially, a vulgar understanding of ideology as an autonomous means
of duping the true subject of history, the (white, imperial) working
class as to its “real” interests.

To give a wider historical sense of this, *Satnam Virdee’s Racism, Class
and the Racialized Other* is essential, five brief points are helpful.
Firstly, a tendency, which first appeared with the defeat of Chartism,
is the relation between racism and working class defeat: racism both
disorganises and weakens the working class [^post-31-26]. The second
point is that racism is a key part of the integration of a section of
the working class into the British state and capitalism. After the
defeat of Chartism and the waning of the “heroic age of the proletariat”
(Anderson),

> Racism was consolidated among an ever-expanding constituency of
> workers. Facilitated by the rise of Britain as the hegemon of the
> modern world system, the elite learnt to rule in a more consensual
> manner at home. Through the granting of political reforms and the
> guarantee of relative economic security between the 1850s and 1940s,
> the British elites ideologically incorporated ever larger components
> of the working class into the imagined nation as active citizens of
> the polity...what accompanied this elite process of reform was that
> slowly but surely those workers to whom such elite privileges were
> granted began to imbibe an idea of the British nation underpinned by
> its notion of a singular people united by race and religion
> [^post-31-27].

The relationship here between integration through the, increasingly
consensual, rule of the ruling class on the one hand and elite
reformism, and the integration through moderate reformism of (parts of)
the working class is mutually sustaining. A third point, relevant to
immigration and racism, that offers a greater cause for optimism, and
also supports a demand for a more radical, internationalist and
socialist position on immigration from Labour, is that Virdee notes
working class racism can break down at times of crisis, which
strengthens the working class movement. If we are in a situation of
interlinked crises, including a hegemonic one, there is an opening for a
rapid, major break. Although, equally, the risk exists of an
intensification of racist feeling, especially given a situation where,
as discussed by both Williams and Benn, the ruling class is increasingly
less able to guarantee relative economic security.

This also underpins the perspective of damming the manifesto as a list
to Santa Claus; the presumption here is of scarce resources to be fought
over within the working class, pitting sectional interests against each
other. The Corbynite break with austerity is a break with this that
integrates partial demands into a total programme. As Virdee writes,

> Systematic change occurs only when those long-established co-ordinates
> of hegemonic domination, which lock in place key fractions of the
> working class through a combination of coercion and consent, begin to
> unravel amid sustained conflict and crisis. It is in the course of
> re-negotiating the settlement that workers become more amenable to
> alternative narratives or frames through which to understand their
> social position and the crisis more generally. That is, they begin to
> peel away from the political consensus that has held firm and shift to
> the political right and left. That is why such moments of crisis
> represent a key moment of potential systematic change, although the
> outcome can never be predicted in advance but is determined by the
> relations of force [^post-31-28].

5. Integration into Imperialism and its Limits on domestic Radicalism
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Two further arguments which ground Virdee’s analysis bear on the worst
section of policies in the manifesto, those around defence- supporting
Trident renewal, commitment to NATO and spending more than 2% of GDP on
defence and supporting the “world-leading” British defence industry,
which essentially commits to the continued integration of the UK into a
US-led imperial system ([p.
120](http://www.labour.org.uk/page/-/Images/manifesto-2017/labour-manifesto-2017.pdf)).
This integration which both affords considerable benefits to the UK but
sets its social and geographical organisation and limits the
possibilities for socialist advance. Virdee notes, firstly, the
imaginative limitations of restricting arguments and struggles for
socialism solely on the terrain of the nation and the constraining
political impacts of this. As Virdee argues, this tendency not only
limited international solidarity but, intersecting with the inclusion of
a greater part of the working class in the nation, saw “further
racialization of nationalism that prevented another, more recently
arrived social group from being included”[^post-31-29].

As Virdee argues, whilst this has been the dominant tendency in the
labour movement in Britain, it does not exhaust it, with currents of
proletarian internationalism always being sustained largely, but not
exclusively, by socialists from racialized minorities. For
[Thompson](https://www.marxists.org/archive/thompson-ep/1965/english.htm)
(against Anderson and Nairn), these internationalist anti-imperialist
tendencies, whilst usually minority ones, are key to understanding how
the “temporary triumph of CND at Labour’s Annual Conference in 1960
appears not (as Nairn has it) as a “miracle” but as the authentic
expression of a tradition, deeply rooted, not only in an intelligentsia
but in the trade unions and constituency parties.” Corbyn, of course, is
part of this tradition, and it is a tradition which often, in its
closeness to Labour, while being outside labourism, has been one of the
ways in which alternative values have been generated and impacted on
Labour- the peace movement is probably the first really significant
social movement to have this impact on Labour.

This porosity between the international and the domestic, is the final
key point of Virdee’s account, expressed in his methodological
conceptions, Virdee describes Racism, Class and the Racialized Other as
a “study of the world in England”[^post-31-30] because “the same web of
social and economic networks that bound the colonies to England, and
then Britain in an unequal relationship, and ensured that everyday
foodstuffs such as tea, coffee and sugar would come to form a staple
part of our everyday diet, also brought men and women from all corners
of the world to England” [^post-31-31].

There are, therefore, significant parallels between Virdee and Padmore,
the external contradictions of imperialism become internal, both to
Britain itself and to the Labour Party. The positions on defence in the
manifesto are not just a moral failing, continuing the labour movement’s
presumption morality stops outside Britain, but has a domestic impact
(and this impact goes far beyond a “Jobs not Bombs” type criticism).
However, precisely because of its domestic impact, there is a solid
basis, one that will be aided by Trump’s Presidency, and the
particularly [grim ways in which a Tory Brexit will integrate the
British economy with the
US’s](https://www.opendemocracy.net/ournhs/nhs-theresa-mays-dowry-gift-to-donald-trump),
for building a wider bloc for socialism against imperialism. Whether
intentionally or not, the Labour Right’s enthusiasm (and the presence of
these policies in the manifesto) for non-socialist internationalist
positions on borders and defence fixes the working class in a fragmented
and subordinate, corporate position of passive reformism and limits the
unfolding of a socialist programme. It is worth noting that this is not
exclusively a position of those identified with the Old Labour Right;
Paul Mason, would be an example of a figure identified with the left
with these commitments. The working class becoming hegemonic requires a
process of breaking with imperialism and the fixing of class relations
(both internal to the working class and between the working and ruling
class). It is unclear, however, precisely at what point, today, this
would limit the development and implementation of a left programme; but
what should be clear, against MPs like [Neil
Coyl](http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4614420/Labour-MP-mocks-idea-Jeremy-Corbyn-won.html/)e,
is that, pushed far enough, Trident is not an esoteric, moralising issue
but a class one.

Historically, the most significant example of the limitation of
possibilities through integration into imperialism was the Wilson
government. With Wilson the ambiguity between genuine socialist
transformation and tinkering efforts to modernise the UK's moribund
capitalism was resolved very much in favour of the latter, indeed
resolved to such an extent that very little of the modernisation could
happen. One major reason for the ambiguities in Wilson's domestic
programme being resolved rightwards was the limitations imposed by
accepting the international context. Raymond Williams writes of

> A very rapid transit of most CND people I knew back into the CLPs-
> into the 'new model' Labour Party as they spoke of it, curiously, even
> after the strength of the Labour machine had been demonstrated by the
> reversal of nuclear policy. In my view the biggest mistake made was
> not the overestimate of the possibilities of an alternative moment
> from '58 to '61, but the resigned re-acceptance of conventional
> politics which followed from '62 to '64- with the illusions about the
> Labour Party which went along with it…what was generally forgotten was
> the lesson, not only of the CND experience but also of the left-right
> controversy in the Labour Party in the early fifties: that there was a
> necessary interlock between the Anglo-American military-political
> alliance in NATO and the pattern of possible social-economic
> priorities at home. Now when many socialists went back into the Labour
> Party in 1963 they started talking very persuasively about all the
> reforms the Labour government was going to accomplish in the social
> sphere and even the chance they might tackle some of the cultural
> issues, but there was an absolutely fatal evasion about foreign policy
> in a broader sense.[^post-31-32]

This, worryingly, is at least one possible future for Corbynism; a
failure to democratise the Party and challenge the reactionary strength
of the Party machine, left compromises and defeats, especially regarding
foreign policy, meaning contradictions in the programme and social
movement pressures being resolved rightwards, especially through the
theme of modernisation spiriting away values. A further factor,
overlapping with what a left constitutional reformism would involve, is
the very serious limitations on democracy involved in NATO membership-
acceptance of a subordinate role within a US-led military form, and
nuclear weapons- the grotesque aspect of TV debate audiences demanding
Corbyn annihilate millions in a decision that, imagined as taking place
without deliberation, without any form of accountability, is an affront,
and a corrosive affront to democracy.

However, and here the debate between Williams and Thompson over
“exterminism” in 1980 is useful, this porosity of the domestic and
international and the constraints imposed on a social-economic programme
by integration on an international level, also allow for a broader,
stronger bloc to challenge imperialism. Whilst Thompson's essay “[Notes
on Exterminism, The Last Stage of
Civilisation](https://newleftreview.org/I/121/edward-thompson-notes-on-exterminism-the-last-stage-of-civilization)”
was profoundly influential, the first thing to note about it is that it
is, frankly, some of his worst work. In the contrast between great moral
rectitude and passion on the one hand, and very clear theoretical and
strategic weakness, Thompson's essay has a great deal in common with
much reflection on nuclear weapons. The key to the weakness of
Thompson's analysis is his claim that the question of nuclear
disarmament transcended class distinctions, with the possibility of
nuclear annihilation not a class issue but a human one. By contrast, for
Williams, in his “[The Politics of Nuclear
Disarmament](https://newleftreview.org/I/124/raymond-williams-the-politics-of-nuclear-disarmament)”,
this position, and the linked desire for a broad, autonomous and
specifically unilateralist campaign, led to fatal equivocations and a
limited strategic sense. For Williams, the end point of this tendency in
both Thompson and the peace movement was unclarity and rhetorical
evasions, which dissolve everything into merely “simple restatement of
the horrors of nuclear war, which are indeed the beginning but cannot
function as the conclusion of any of the arguments.”

Williams's substantially more useful essay begins with the far more
modest question of “what is or should be the specifically socialist and
explicitly anti-imperialist contribution to activity against the nuclear
arms race”, rather than Thompson's efforts to designate a particular
(potentially final) stage of civilisation. Williams, moreover, opposes
Thompson’s technological determinism in “Exterminism”, with its tendency
to detach the development of nuclear weapons from human struggles,
leading to a moral, even religious, stance of protest and prophesy,
rather than genuinely political action. For Williams, by contrast,
possibilities of political action and successful resistance, rather than
helplessness beneath the crushing machine, are rooted in human actions,
interests and intentions, and a grasping of them in concrete situations.
In Thompson, only an appeal to morality is available (this is too
pessimistic) but this appeal could work (this is too optimistic).
Williams, therefore, is particularly scathing about the politics this
kind of position (and Thompson's essay is a theoretical condensation of
the positions of a large section of the early 1980s peace movement). For
Williams,

> Unilateralism of a non-pacifist kind, in the 1980s, has either to be
> coherently political, with all its consequences followed through, or
> to resign itself to rhetorical evasiveness. It is clear that the loose
> assembly of diverse political forces around unilateralism, which for a
> time held but then failed to hold in the late 1950s and early 1960s,
> cannot now for long be reconstituted on the old terms. What has always
> been insufficient in its arguments, but now much less forgiveably, is
> any realistic facing of the full significance of such an act by a
> state like Britain. It is significantly often at this point, when in
> any political campaign aiming for majority support the most stringent
> realism is an absolute requirement, that there is a rhetorical loop
> back to the undoubted evils and dangers of nuclear war and to the
> abstraction of ‘the Bomb’. What then must we really face? The central
> fact is that Britain at every level—military, political, economic and
> cultural— has been locked into ‘the alliance’, which is at once a
> life-or-death military system and a powerful organization of the most
> developed capitalist states and economies. To take Britain out of that
> alliance would be a major shift in the balance of forces, and
> therefore at once a confrontation of the most serious kind. Every kind
> of counterforce, certainly economic and political, would be at once
> deployed against it, and there could be no restriction of the
> resulting struggle to the theoretically separable issue of nuclear
> weapons. Thus a theoretically restricted campaign, based on an
> eventual popular refusal of the dangers of nuclear war, would arrive,
> in reality, at a stage of general struggle for which it would be quite
> unprepared.

Williams, therefore, gets us to a crucial impasse, one to be solved in
practice; any serious socialist programme requires a break with
imperialism more widely (it is not, ultimately, tenable to oppose
nuclear weapons but wish to remain in NATO), but the political forces to
enable such a break with imperialism are barely developed. However, what
can be built with longer, harder and more varied work, that would stand
at least some chance of success, would be an alliance of all those
opposed to the current order of things. As Williams argues, the UK's
possession of nuclear weapons implicates huge swathes of military,
economic, political and cultural life, these areas, broadly understood,
are the sites of both struggle for and resistance to disarmament. This,
then, is to argue for the necessity for a substantial break by the UK
from the global system, from its place within it and from its
implications in determining national politics. The argument runs both
ways, on the one hand, to eliminate the UK's nuclear weapons requires
considerable and widespread mobilisation and argument throughout society
linking nuclear weapons and NATO to a host of other struggles, on the
other, not eliminating nuclear weapons, as well as being a great moral
evil and threat to humanity, entails the continued integration into this
whole global system with serious implications for what is possible
nationally.

This sort of widespread mobilisation against the totality of things and
the functioning of nuclear weapons within that totality is probably a
precondition for a left-led Labour Party adopting a unilateral position,
it is even more likely the precondition of the adoption of that position
not being electorally disastrous and, even if the incredibly unlikely
were to happen and Labour won an election on a unilateralist platform,
it is the precondition of such a government being able to carry through
such a programme. At the same time, failing to disarm would be a moral
and political disaster. The reason for NATO and military opposition is
that getting rid of them would affect the UK's integration into it and
the balance of forces in the UK, it would limit the control over
subjects that is one result and motivation of interstate hegemony. There
are various points where other struggles come together with anti-nuclear
ones including, but not limited to: [feminist struggles, particularly
over the domination of a particular system of values stressing violence,
abuse and
coercio](https://www.opendemocracy.net/5050/rebecca-johnson/occupy-movement-and-women-of-greenham-common)n,
anti-imperialist struggles; and struggles against racism (the racialised
(dis)organisation of the working-class as a product of the specific form
of working-class integration into imperialism through integration into a
particular UK state).

The acceptance by the leadership of compromises with reactionary forces
over immigration, and capitulation to them over defence policy, is a
moral failing. It is also an acceptance of a serious limitation of the
scope of the values of the project, both in terms of imposing a
limitation on who is included within those values, and limiting their
capacity to be fully realised. Defending the spirit of the manifesto
requires a major break with its positions in these areas.

What is to be Done?
-------------------

How far the leadership are to blame for their compromises and
capitulations, and how far these represent a sensible assessment of the
balance of forces in the Party and the state of public opinion is, now,
in terms of guiding the actions of the grassroots left, almost entirely
academic. The point is to work for a situation where these compromises
will not be made in future, which requires a grasp of how capitalism and
imperialism create contradictions that are internal to Labour. One vital
area is to push for far massive democratisation of the Party, including
the democratisation of policy making, which would seriously alter the
balance of forces in our favour, as [we have
argued](https://newsocialist.org.uk/organising-for-conference/) [in *New
Socialist*](https://newsocialist.org.uk/transforming-labour-rule-changes-for-2018/).
As suggested by Williams’s and Wainwright’s stress on the lack of Party
democracy being a central part of the integration of the working class
and social movement struggles into capitalism, imperialism and the
state. Secondly, there is a need to develop and/or engage with social
movement struggles outside the Party, both to sharpen and strengthen
demands and to help create a radical extra-parliamentary power to make
the implementation of a left programme in government more likely.
Thirdly, there are a wide set of necessary political education and
cultural projects to try to transform common sense around these issues.
All three of these areas suggest a continued and dynamic campaigning and
organising ethos, but one that is not identical to being on a constant
election footing.

Implementing the Manifesto Out of Office
----------------------------------------

The standard, tedious anti-Corbyn refrain, demanding compromise with the
right (as if Corbyn hadn’t done so very substantially) was that a left
programme was unelectable and that the best policies meant nothing out
of office. The election result should have done for this line of
“argument”, [it has
not](https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jun/10/chris-leslie-labour-should-have-won-against-theresa-may-open-goal).
Three points can be made against this
Parliamentary/Ministerialist/Electoralist fixation; firstly, at in local
councils, Mayoralties and the Welsh Assembly, Labour is in office;
secondly, a party with the extent and enthusiasm of support we have now
could accomplish considerable things without the mediation of the state;
thirdly, the implied premise of this position is that when in office
policies can be implemented smoothly, this may be true for an
unthreatening Labour programme, it is certainly true for a Conservative
one with a workable majority, it is substantially untrue for a left
Labour one. As [Anderson
argues](https://newleftreview.org/I/23/perry-anderson-origins-of-the-present-crisis),

> Parliament, he formal site of political power, is two quite different
> ‘places’ according to which Party is in power. Its role in the power
> system is analytically distinct in each case. When a Conservative
> government is in power, it is an integral part of a continuous
> landscape which extends in a smooth, unbroken space around it. When a
> Labour government is in power, it is an isolated, spot-lit enclave,
> surrounded on almost every side by hostile territory, unceasingly
> shelled by industry, press and orchestrated ‘public opinion’. Each
> time it has in the end been over-run.

It should be added too, that there are also [fifth
columnists](https://newsocialist.org.uk/a-vow-of-silence-a-chronicle-of/)within
the Labour Party.

Institutionalising values, therefore, has never only been a question of
using Parliamentary power, it can be about using municipal power and the
power of a movement to deliver consequences. Electoralism should be
understood here not as a general tendency of the Labour Party in
contradiction with (external) developments of autonomous forces, but of
a tendency towards the closure of criticism through demands for unity
and an exclusive focus on the short-term temporalities of the media,
opinion polls and elections rather than the very different temporalities
and forms of openness and accountability of movement building, that also
exist, though usually in a marginalised way within the Party.Therefore,
a radical transformation of the Party into both an electoral force and
an instrument for direct social transformation is necessary. These two
will always be in contradiction, and, going back to the argument of *The
Long Revolution*, have always been in tension, but there are ways in
which this contradiction can be made productive rather than either
destructive or stablising through the marginalisation of
non-electoralist tendencies. There are various ways in which, in some
cases, policies in the manifesto, or at least themes, may be implemented
with Labour out of national office. In other cases, it is more a
question of institutionalising and using the Party as an instrument of
the manifesto’s values, sometimes against its compromises. Some of these
considerations overlap with Tom Blackburn’s fine [“Corbynism from
Below”](https://newsocialist.org.uk/corbynism-from-below/) essay, and it
is necessary to remember that, while a great deal can be accomplished
outside of office, and, “despite the real potential they hold,” as
Blackburn argues, “grassroots organising and campaigning can do no more
than partly ameliorate the damage being done by continuing austerity.”
These efforts at institutionalisation can also be read as part of a
populism of need, which is not restricted to a narrow notion of the
political, but which grasps the extent by which kindness, solidarity and
organisation can challenge suffering that is taken for natural.

Firstly, it is possible that, with a certain amount of wit, parts of the
democratically led investment agenda may be carried out a local level
within the existing limitations imposed by national government. The
trailblazer here, which *[New
Socialist](https://newsocialist.org.uk/labours-alternative-models-of-ownership-report/)*
has discussed, is Preston. There is necessary work here to disseminate
lessons from Preston, to analyse how they could be deployed in different
places in response to local needs and capacities. The spread of the
Preston model would also require organisational pressure on councillors,
and, if necessary, the clearing out of those who would be a barrier to
it.

Other areas where parts of the manifesto and its values may be
implemented concern the possibility of its direct implementation without
the mediation of national or local government, as well as putting
pressure on the state. In many of these areas there already exist groups
doing significant work as well as a bedrock of community solidarities,
what Labour should be able to add is very significant numbers of people
and a presence across the country. The easy argument here would be to
say Labour should become a party of social movements. However, this
understates not only the institutional, cultural and political changes
this would require in parts of the country with a powerful social
movement presence but also the weakness of autonomous social movements
in large parts of Britain, Labour could have a considerable role, albeit
a difficult and contradictory one, in launching and nurturing movements
around social reproduction.

Substantial organisational pressure and removal of councillors is also
required when it comes to housing, which is the area where the failure
of the movement to address the actions of Labour councillors, within a
broad acceptance of “unity” and that local government is administration
not politics, has been most damaging. The manifesto correctly attacks
the Tory failure on housing over the last seven years. However, the
“Tory housing crisis” ([p.
60](http://www.labour.org.uk/page/-/Images/manifesto-2017/labour-manifesto-2017.pdf))
is just one part of the current conjunctural intensification of the
crisis, there is, even on the conjunctural level a Labour housing crisis
caused by many Labour councils (for the difference between conjunctural
and structural aspects of the housing crisis [my
review](http://review31.co.uk/article/view/407/what-is-the-rent-trap) of
*The Rent Trap* and Engel's *[The Housing
Question](https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1872/housing-question/)*).
Housing is also a significant case where, beginning to address and even
meet needs, whether through national policy, the transformation of
council policy or direct challenges to councils, begins to bring in a
whole set of interlocked struggles and move from the conjunctural to
begin to address the structural. The first task, one which necessarily
falls on Labour members, is to challenge and remove councillors
responsible for inhumane housing policies. As [I’ve argued
before](https://medium.com/@Tom_Gann/delivering-consequences-how-momentum-can-make-a-difference-locally-58f6c02664fa),
the Left, possibly organised in Momentum, possibly in other ways, should
be able to serve as a means of transmitting the popular needs,
experiences and demands that are organised in grassroots struggles which
often have an extra-parliamentary ethos, in such a way that local Labour
councillors are further challenged for their failures. It would also
entail being a voice for these movements in the development of council
manifestos, or if at all possible, the opening up of these processes to
those most affected by the housing crisis even if they are not Labour
members.

This transmission role requires a porosity to existing radical struggles
around housing, but also an openness to demands from groups who may (and
given the actions of local councils, justifiably) be hostile to Labour.
Here there is a further contradiction around “internal exile” and the
meeting of needs, on the one hand, a certain broadly anarchist critique
of reformism condemns itself to this sort of internal exile on the level
of changing national policies, on the other hand, at a local level, it
is anarchist-inclined groups who are struggling to meet popular needs
and make what remians of the social democratic state actual against
Labour councils, who thereby alienate themselves from the people. In
areas without these organisations, the Left has the capacity to
establish them to challenge Labour councils directly, from a place
inside, by trying to impact on policy and the composition of
representatives, and outside the Party, by organising to meet housing
needs, against the council directly, whether by offering advice,
buddying, or more antagonistically challenging the council. There will
be difficult contradictions to negotiate here, especially in ensuring
the autonomous character of housing movements under electoralist
pressure not to criticise Labour councils. However, in large parts of
the country it is likely that only Labour has the capacity to launch and
sustain such organisations. The building up of these sort of
organisations and the development of Labour’s porosity to them would
also help to build up some of the necessary social power to aid the
implementation of a left programme and challenge backsliding from the
leadership.

There is further work that could be done, again perhaps through contact
or at least openness to existing extra-parliamentary struggles around
immigration and borders. This would have a further, crucial advantage of
helping to build an anti-racist movement in contact with Labour that was
useful and not a tool for [laundering the reputation of the
SWP](http://www.politics.co.uk/news/2016/10/17/jeremy-corbyn-supporters-demands-apology-rape-victim-swp).
For example, working with, and promoting the positions of [organisations
opposed](http://www.docsnotcops.co.uk/) [to everyday
borders](https://www.schoolsabc.net/), not only through campaigning work
but through challenging their operation directly, would both, through
the numbers Labour should be able to bring to help these struggles, and
the strengthening of these voices in policy making.

A further area of struggle, corresponding with the manifestos focus on
universal needs with the free school meals policy, could be around
provision of food, which again becomes relatively simple with a
substantial membership. Breakfast clubs may be the most plausible option
here, and would help support community resilience, bring a wider range
of experiences and struggles into contact, at the very least, with the
Party, and demonstrate, practically, the usefulness of solidarity in
directly meeting community needs. Breakfast clubs could also become the
basis for community hubs or social centres offering political and
cultural education and possibly legal advice or advice on benefits and
housing rights. This would make use of the knowledge and expertise of
party members, and partially directly addressing the manifesto’s
criticisms of how “justice today has become the preserve of the rich.
Budget cuts mean that thousands are deprived of fair resolutions.
Justice is eroded by the poor decisions of privatised assessments, by
the withdrawal of legal aid.” ([p.
80](http://www.labour.org.uk/page/-/Images/manifesto-2017/labour-manifesto-2017.pdf))
More generally, and ambitiously, the size of Labour’s membership also
offers, as *New Socialist* argued in our
[report](https://newsocialist.org.uk/labours-alternative-models-of-ownership-report/)
on *Alternative Models of Ownership*, the possibility of developing a
variety of co-operative forms,

> The role for the institutions of the world of labour also points to a
> task for local government even if we are not in power nationally, and
> even for grassroots Labour members it may be possible for us to launch
> co-operative means of satisfying human needs, which would demonstrate
> the practicality of our values and create new associational political
> forms.

This is only a brief sketch of possible ways in which the values and
some of the policies expressed in the manifesto could be
institutionalised with Labour outside of government. Many of these forms
would also both strengthen Labour electorally and, as [Blackburn
argues](https://newsocialist.org.uk/corbynism-from-below/),

> This work and the building of new labour movement institutions must
> not be an end in itself. Rather, it should aim to lay the foundations
> for a mass movement which can empower a future Labour government not
> just to occupy office, but to wield power with the goal of delivering
> wide-ranging social transformation.

Understanding the centrality of the struggle over values - not in an
idealist sense, but of values as experientially rooted and emerging from
struggle and as serious, practical forces - is the basis for
understanding both what a break with the established order the manifesto
is, but also the pressures to reabsorb it into that order. The Party as
it stands, both in its composition at senior levels, and its structures,
is not equal to this break in values, and, without both substantial
democratisation internally and the opening up of the party to wider
social forces, the programme is likely to slip back into a fragmented,
subordinate reformism that would also be diluted in its implementation.
The alternative, to build a reformism both on the level of programme and
social forces that, in its ability to push beyond itself, to interlock
struggles and attack the common enemy of all human hopes, is beginning
to be articulated and struggled for; but it is a long process,
requiring, but also producing, [confidence, courage, humour, cunning and
steadfastness in this
struggle](https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/benjamin/1940/history.htm).

[^post-31-1]: Raymond Williams, *The Long Revolution*, Penguin Books:
    London, 1961, p. 328.

[^post-31-2]: Williams, *The Long Revolution*, p. 328.

[^post-31-3]: Williams, *The Long Revolution*, p. 329.

[^post-31-4]: Williams, *The Long Revolution*, p. 329.

[^post-31-5]: Raymond Williams, *Culture and Society*, Penguin Books,
    London, 1958, p. 312.

[^post-31-6]: Raymond Williams, “Notes on Marxism in Britain since 1945”
    in *Culture and Materialism*, London, Verso, 2005.

[^post-31-7]: Hilary Wainwright, *Beyond the Fragments: Feminism and the
    Making of Socialism*, London, Merlin Press, 1979, p. 17.

[^post-31-8]: Hilary Wainwright, *Labour: A Tale of Two Parties*,
    London, Hogarth Press, 1987, p. 294-5.

[^post-31-9]: Wainwright, *A Tale of Two Parties*, p. 256.

[^post-31-10]: Wainwright, *A Tale of Two Parties*, p. 257.

[^post-31-11]: Wainwright, *A Tale of Two Parties*, pp. 17-53.

[^post-31-12]: Antonio Gramsci, *Selections from the Prison Notebooks*,
    London, Lawrence and Wishart, p. 423.

[^post-31-13]: Gramsci, *Selections from the Prison Notebooks*, pp.
    196-200.

[^post-31-14]: Williams, “Notes on Marxism in Britain since 1945”, pp.
    247-8.

[^post-31-15]: Williams, “Notes on Marxism in Britain since 1945”, p.
    249.

[^post-31-16]: Williams, “Notes on Marxism in Britain since 1945”, p.
    248.

[^post-31-17]: Williams, “Notes on Marxism in Britain since 1945”, p.
    247, 249.

[^post-31-18]: Ernesto Laclau and Chantal Mouffe, *Hegemony and
    Socialist Strategy: Towards a Radical Democratic Politics*, London,
    Verso, 2001, p. xvii.

[^post-31-19]: Laclau and Mouffe, \*Hegemony and Socialist Strategy”, p.
    x.

[^post-31-20]: Bertolt Brecht, *Poems 1913-56*, London, Methuen, 1987,
    p. 328.

[^post-31-21]: Wainwright, *Beyond the Fragments*,p. 5.

[^post-31-22]: Wainwright, *A Tale of Two Parties*, p. 256.

[^post-31-23]: Laclau and Mouffe, *Hegemony and Socialist Strategy*, p.
    xv.

[^post-31-24]: Williams, “Notes on Marxism in Britain since 1945”, p.
    248.

[^post-31-25]: Wainwright, *A Tale of Two Parties*, p.257.

[^post-31-26]: Satnam Virdee, *Racism, Class and the Racialized Other*,
    Basingstoke, Palgrave MacMillan, 2014, p. 5.

[^post-31-27]: Virdee, *Racism, Class and the Racialized Other*, p. 5.

[^post-31-28]: Virdee, *Racism, Class and the Racialized Other*, p. 7.

[^post-31-29]: Virdee, *Racism, Class and the Racialized Other*, p. 5.

[^post-31-30]: Virdee, *Racism, Class and the Racialized Other*, p. 3.

[^post-31-31]: Virdee, *Racism, Class and the Racialized Other*, p. 2.

[^post-31-32]: Raymond Williams, \*Politics and Letters: Interviews with
    New Left Review, London, Verso, 2015.
