Poor Gramsci
============

by [Chris Green](https://twitter.com/chrsgrn)

In 1987, the late Stuart Hall published an essay titled ‘[Gramsci and
Us](http://www.unz.org/Pub/MarxismToday-1987jun-00016)’ in *Marxism
Today*, then (still officially at least) the theoretical journal of the
Communist Party of Great Britain. In this short essay Hall describes how
the writings of Antonio Gramsci – the Italian communist leader
imprisoned by Mussolini’s fascist regime from 1926 until his death in
1937 – had helped him to make sense of Thatcherism, to properly grasp
its historical significance as something much more than just a shift to
the right in British electoral politics. Hall’s essay also stands,
however, as something of a eulogy for a waning era of British
Gramscianism, a period in which the Italian thinker's work had a fairly
remarkable influence on British politics and culture. [David
Forgacs](https://newleftreview.org/I/176/david-forgacs-gramsci-and-marxism-in-britain)
has written that, aside from in his native Italy, “nowhere more than in
Britain have Gramsci’s writings exercised so prolonged, deep or
diversified an influence”. Yet the particularly ‘British’ Gramsci that
first began to emerge in the 1950s – and who was seized upon with great
earnest following the publication of the landmark *Selections from the
Prison Notebooks* in 1971 – was a fairly uneven and imbalanced thinker,
one whose work was often contorted to satisfy the desires of a
marginalised and sectarian British left still coming to terms with the
uncomfortable realities of Soviet communism.

This longing for an intellectual figurehead who could solve the problems
of British Marxism was nevertheless at odds with the Gramsci of the
fragmentary writings of the prison notebooks. What Hall had tried to
emphasise was that Gramsci had never been a thinker who tried to offer a
complete or general political theory. Having watched the great European
proletarian moment ebb away from his fascist prison cell, Gramsci’s
prison writings instead represent an attempt to understand the
importance of the particular historical moment, rather than the general
movement of history. “We mustn’t use Gramsci (as we have for so long
abused Marx)”, Hall writes, &gt; like an Old Testament prophet who, at
the correct moment, will offer us the consoling and appropriate
quotation. We can’t pluck up this ‘Sardinian’ from his specific and
unique political formation, beam him down at the end of the 20th
century, and ask him to solve our problems for us: especially since the
whole thrust of his thinking was to refuse this easy transfer of
generalisations from one conjuncture, nation or epoch to another.([p.
16](http://www.unz.org/Pub/MarxismToday-1987jun-00016))

It’s hard not to think of Hall’s words when reading [Paul Mason in the
*Guardian*](https://www.theguardian.com/politics/commentisfree/2017/jun/12/paul-mason-jeremy-corbyn-defeat-ruling-elite-antonio-gramsci),
almost exactly thirty years later, claim that “Antonio Gramsci, the
Italian communist leader who died in a fascist jail in 1937, would have
had no trouble understanding Corbyn’s rise, Labour’s poll surge, or
predicting what happens next.” There’s something particularly striking
about Mason – a writer whose recent work has argued that contemporary
capitalism is entering a new and unique historical epoch – invoking
Gramsci in the present in such a historically unreflective way. While
Mason’s article does gesture towards the uniqueness of the present by
describing some recent changes in social composition (“the 20th-century
working class is being replaced as the main actor – in both the economy
and oppositional politics – by the networked individual”), rather than
reflect upon what such changes might imply for the concepts Gramsci
developed to think through the failures of the working class movements
of the early twentieth century, Mason simply applies them as given to
the current state of things. As a result, one of Mason’s key claims
about the phenomenon of Corbyn's success is that the process of
disrupting ‘common sense’ – Gramsci’s term for our acquired and largely
uncritical conceptions of the world – is simpler now, because of how
easily “networked, educated people can see through bullshit.”

Yet for Gramsci, common sense is never simply about ideological deceit
or indoctrination. Rather, the term acts as more as a guide for thinking
about how the ways in which we come to understand the world around us,
through our own intellectual activity, are shaped by hegemonic cultural
and social forms, and how subordinate groups in society come to see the
world in the same terms as those at the top, despite their divergent
interests. Mason seems largely uninterested in dwelling too long on what
a twenty-first century common sense might look like, preferring instead
to emphasise the potentially disruptive potential of contemporary social
and technological relations. Yet it is difficult to see why being highly
educated (i.e. having gone to university), or having access to global
communicative and information networks, would not be absolutely central
aspects of the production and reproduction of common sense today, let
alone offer some natural point of resistance to it. At the very least it
seems remarkable that, as someone with a Twitter account, Mason would
think that a heavily networked society tended to reduce the amount of
bullshit circulating.

While it is perhaps unfair to pick solely on Mason here, his article
nevertheless provides an interesting point from which to reflect upon
the status of Gramsci – or perhaps more specifically, a certain style of
Gramscian thinking – within Corbynism, both as a project itself and in
attempts to make sense of it. Something which immediately needs to be
considered is the illocutionary effect of invoking Gramsci himself
today. Mason himself gestures towards something on this point when he
states that “Labour has, quite rightly, tried to keep Karl Marx out of
the election. But there is one Marxist whose work provides the key to
understanding what just happened.” Here, Mason appears to be saying that
Gramsci is both a better guide to making sense of this recent election
than Marx, and is a less politically toxic name to publicly call upon.
While the latter seems unremarkable, the two points are closely related
— the ease with which Gramsci's work can be called upon to make sense of
a variety of phenomena, in an often quite starkly un-Marxist fashion, is
a large part of the reason why Gramsci’s name circulates so less
encumbered than Marx’s. The fact that Gramsci appeared as an
idiosyncratic internal critic of orthodox Marxism was a large part of
his appeal throughout the twentieth century, beginning with the
reconstitution of the Italian communist party under Palmiro Togliatti.
Yet an emphasis on Gramsci's apparently anti-Marxist tendencies has led
to his thought being enthusiastically adopted to a wide variety of ends,
from the ‘post-Marxist’ discourse analysis of Chantal Mouffe and Ernesto
Laclau, to the modernization-fetishising proto-Blairite tendencies of
the later *Marxism Today*. As certain events during the second Corbyn
leadership election hinted at, there remains a certain intellectual and
moral authority granted to Marxists seen as willing to turn their
criticism towards the left. The danger here is that merely invoking
Gramsci’s work can lend a certain radical intellectual gloss to
unimaginatively reformist or even reactionary politics. One thing
Mason’s piece makes clearly visible is the way in which a certain
cut-and-paste use of Gramscian concepts can simultaneously generate both
an unhelpful cautiousness and a wildly buoyant enthusiasm, thoroughly
unbalancing the oft-repeated Gramscian aphorism “pessimism of the
intellect, optimism of the will”.[^post-32-1] Thus, while Mason states
that the left “must eschew hubris” and “must reject the illusion that
with one lightning breakthrough we can envelop the defences of the
British ruling class”, he also claims, presumably in all seriousness,
that Corbyn “has publicly destroyed the logic of neoliberalism – and
forced the ideology of xenophobic nationalist economics into retreat”.

Here it’s worth turning to Gramsci himself, who wrote in The Modern
Prince that “\[a\] common error in historico-political analysis consists
in an inability to find the correct relation between what is organic and
what is conjunctural” — that is, between the ‘deep’ forms of crisis and
the efforts being made to defend or contest the existing order of
things.[^post-32-2] Gramsci warned that failing to get this relation
between organic and conjunctural right risked producing either
“economism”, where too much weight is given to economic forces while
neglecting politics; or “ideologism”, in which the historical roles of
“top political leaders and personalities with direct governmental
responsibilities” is similarly overemphasised.[^post-32-3] Hall lamented
that the left, caught in the hubris of thinking it understands what
really causes historical change, had failed to grasp the significance of
Thatcherism as an attempt to solve the crisis of the 1970s through the
construction of a new ‘historical bloc’ and a new common sense:
“...though those transformations are changing the political terrain of
struggle before our very eyes” Hall writes, “we think the differences
don’t have any real effect on anything. It still feels more ‘left-wing’
to say the old ruling class politics goes on in the same old way.”([p.
16](http://www.unz.org/Pub/MarxismToday-1987jun-00016))

With Corbynism, however, the risk seems to come from the opposite
direction. This is not to say that the consolidation of Corbyn's
leadership of the Labour Party and the result of the 2017 general
election do not represent a quite remarkable and unexpected opportunity
for the left in Britain – clearly they do. Rather, if we are to take
something from Gramsci beyond the enduring “moral and intellectual
legitimacy” his name bestows, it should be precisely on this question of
the proper relationship between organic and conjunctural, between
‘deeper’ forms of historical crisis and the political contests that
respond to them.[^post-32-4] What clearly needs to be resisted is the
easy temptation to see the election of Corbyn as the social
transformation in itself, and not merely one moment in a history that
could still yet go a number of ways. As Alex Williams and Nick Srnicek
rightly point out in Inventing the Future, “\[the\] event (as
revolutionary rupture) becomes an expression of the desire for novelty
without responsibility"[^post-32-5]. Announcing that Corbyn has
“publicly destroyed the logic of neoliberalism” is not only quite
clearly false, but lets us off the hook for the (inevitably long and
arduous) task of nurturing a new common sense capable of challenging the
dominant forms of individualism that have endured since Thatcher.

This should by no means be read as a defeatist gesture, but rather a
call to not be satisfied with any easy answers as to where the left goes
now. In particular, a healthy scepticism towards the notion of a left
populism (an idea which has become influential largely due to the work
of one of the more contentious readers of Gramsci in Ernesto Laclau) is
particularly vital. The success of Corbyn has so far relied on the
composition of a novel and far from consolidated electoral bloc, and any
declarations that Corbyn has constructed a new ‘people’ are undoubtedly
premature. Yet it’s worth questioning whether such a project is a
possible or even desirable one for the Corbynist left to pursue. Writers
like Paul Gilroy have long questioned the separability of the notion of
a British ‘people’ from a nationalism developed in empire and
postcolonial resentment, while Hall has equally argued that “the force
of history” of established associative connotations has long given the
right the upper hand in constructing populist imaginaries.[^post-32-6]
More broadly, however, the worry remains that Corbynism will become
trapped in a certain quasi-Gramscian mode of thinking which sees
hegemonic struggle as essentially a task of triangulation, of making
gradual left-wing economic reform palatable to the kinds of people who
want more police on our streets, more nuclear weapons, and so on. While
Gramsci's writings on hegemony focus attention on the necessity of the
struggle over existing ideas in society, his work nevertheless reminds
us of the persistent capacity of ruling blocs throughout history to
recompose their rule in times of apparent crisis. We will not succeed in
building a counter-hegemony in Britain today if we seek to make space
within existing common sense, rather than attempting to build a new one.
If we are to take any lesson from the Sardinian today, then, it should
be to have the courage to resist intellectual complacency.

[^post-32-1]: Antonio Gramsci, *Selections from Political Writings
    1921-1926*, ed. and trans. Quintin Hoare (London: Lawrence and
    Wishart, 1978), 19. Often attributed to Gramsci, the line was
    originally one of French writer Romain Rolland’s.

[^post-32-2]: Antonio Gramsci, *Selections from the Prison Notebooks*,
    ed. and trans. Quintin Hoare and Geoffrey Nowell-Smith (London:
    Lawrence & Wishart, 1971), 178.

[^post-32-3]: Gramsci, *Selections from the Prison Notebooks*, p. 176.

[^post-32-4]: In his vitriolic review of Laclau and Mouffe’s 1985 work
    *Hegemony and Socialist Strategy*, [Norman
    Geras](https://newleftreview.org/I/163/norman-geras-post-marxism)
    says, of a passage in the book discussing “the relative merits” of
    Gramsci, Bernstein and Sorel, that “\[everyone\] who knows where
    it’s really at these days, though, will know that Gramsci just has
    to win this part of the game: not because he towers over the other
    two as a thinker; but because, in a certain relevant left milieu, he
    confers a moral and intellectual legitimacy which they cannot.”

[^post-32-5]: Alex Williams and Nick Srnicek, *Inventing the Future:
    Post-Capitalism and a World Without Work* (London: Verso, 2016), p.
    177.

[^post-32-6]: Stuart Hall, ‘Popular-Democratic vs Authoritarian
    Populism: Two Ways of “Taking Democracy Seriously”’, in *Marxism and
    Democracy*, ed. Alan Hunt (London: Lawrence & Wishart, 1980),
    178–79; “In the meantime, there is more proof that English
    nationalism remains volatile material. Manipulative politicians
    should not play with it, even if they have persuaded themselves that
    they can harness its populist magic to benign and wholesome ends.
    Wherever nationalism is politically engaged, all the violent
    perversity of race thinking will not be far away.” Paul Gilroy,
    *Postcolonial Melancholia*, (New York: Columbia University Press,
    2010), 111.
