Reshuffle 2: The Maintenance of the Malcontents
===============================================

by \[oidptg\]https://twitter.com/oidptg)

Earlier this week Corbyn announced a second tranche of post-election
appointments to the shadow front bench. These latest changes fill a
number of vacant sub-Shadow Cabinet level positions, including those
created by the resignation and sackings of six frontbenchers who voted
for Chuka Umunna's amendment to the Queen's Speech on Single Market and
Customs Union membership in defiance of the party's manifesto. Those
departures in particular gutted the shadow Home Office and Communities
and Local Government/Housing teams, with the former‘s Commons contingent
whittled down to just one occupant in Shadow Home Secretary Diane
Abbott. These changes follow the small reshuffle of the Shadow Cabinet
undertaken in mid June, which we covered
[here](https://newsocialist.org.uk/notes-on-the-reshuffle/).

The Maintenance of the Malcontents
----------------------------------

That those who loudly backed Owen Smith in 2016, openly criticised the
leadership and spent much of the recent election campaign carping from
the sidelines should not necessarily be trusted to take the message of
Corbynism to the country would seem self-evident. And yet, some such MPs
feature in this recent reshuffle. The apparent acquiescence of these
individuals to the cause of democratic socialism should be welcomed of
course, but guardedly.

Gloria De Piero, who last year [called
on](https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/1381982/if-you-think-the-country-need-new-leadership-i-am-begging-you-to-join-our-party-and-give-labour-the-champion-they-need/)
the readers of that most unwavering of pro-Labour newspapers *The Sun*
to join the party in order to stop Corbyn’s re-election, has rejoined
the front bench as a shadow justice minister. At the election just gone
her [Nottinghamshire
constituency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ashfield_%28UK_Parliament_constituency%29#Elections_in_the_2010s)
saw a small rise in the Labour vote and a large spike in the
Conservative vote. The wider phenomenon of significant swings to the
Conservatives in constituencies with large working class populations —
though regionally limited and already subject to some wildly reductive
and ill-informed theorising (with the exception of the discussion on
[these
pages](https://newsocialist.org.uk/corbyns-emerging-class-coalition/)) —
is one that should concern the party and those who back Corbyn’s
leadership. What this does not provide however is grounds for the party
to embrace [unreconstructed
Blairism](http://www.progressonline.org.uk/join/join-the-progress-thousand-club/),
[the fringe politics of Blue
Labour](https://libcom.org/book/export/html/36449) or the [“2017
manifesto but with added
racism”](https://twitter.com/oidptg/status/877836783160926208) proffered
by some on the party’s Old Right.

With this understanding it is incredibly frustrating to see De Piero,
just a day after her appointment, [quoted
heavily](https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jul/04/senior-labour-figures-clash-over-concerns-of-working-class-voters)
alongside one of the more vicious members of the party’s Old Right,
Graham “[Iranian
hangmen](https://twitter.com/grahamjones_mp/status/810983655480971264?lang=en)”
Jones, calling for exactly this kind of dilution and distortion of the
party’s programme. The notion that some hasty melange of Corbynism and
Old Right policies and rhetoric would (a) have broad appeal (b) not
provide for some profoundly contradictory positions and (c) maintain the
enthusiasm engendered by the recent manifesto, is patently nonsense and
must be strongly rebuffed.

Melanie Onn, first elected as MP for Great Grimsby in 2015, served in
the last Parliament in the incredibly obscure and fairly pointless
position of Shadow Deputy Leader of the Commons, before joining the
ranks of the mass resignees in the wake of the EU referendum last year.
Before this she [took to the pages of the *Daily
Telegraph*](http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/Jeremy_Corbyn/11864539/Jeremy-Corbyn-is-criticised-by-ex-wife-for-failing-to-give-a-woman-a-top-job-in-his-shadow-cabinet.html)
to suggest that Corbyn has a “women problem” after his first Shadow
Cabinet included just one woman in the four (shadow) ‘Great Offices of
State’, attacking him for “relegating the women” to the apparently
inconsequential “nursing and teaching jobs” of Shadow Health and
Education Secretary. Prior to her election she was head of the party’s
notorious Compliance Unit — the blackened eye of Labour HQ that spent
much of the 2016 leadership election pointlessly purging Labour members
for grave thoughtcrimes such as [liking the Foo
Fighters](http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/labour-membership-appeal-leadership-election-compliance-unit_uk_57c54b46e4b094071b4c8d8e).

Quite what the logic of bringing these MPs back into the fold and
trusting them with even junior shadow ministerial roles is remains a bit
of a mystery. Notions of “party unity” are lost on them and they hold
outdated, miserable politics that are directly at odds with those of the
leadership. Might it be worthwhile — [as Ian Lavery recently
did](http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/politics/labour-party-chairman-ian-lavery-10723909)
— questioning the breadth of your church if a number of its congregation
insist on repeatedly attacking the priest publicly, refuse to sing from
the hymn sheet and think that your Bible isn’t racist enough?

The Left on the Front Bench
---------------------------

The first impression of this second round of appointments was to be
blunt, of a surfeit of moderate MPs and a lack of genuinely left MPs.
The exceptions to this are the welcome appointments of Chris Williamson,
David Drew and the reappointment of Imran Hussain.

David Drew, a member of the Campaign Group who nominated John McDonnell
for the leadership in 2007, joins the shadow Environment, Food and Rural
Affairs team. Representing the semi-rural seat of Stroud and having
served as a member of the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs Committee
between 2001-2010, he would seem a round peg for a round hole.

Chris Williamson, appointed to Diane Abbott’s shadow Home Affairs team,
is another returning MP, having served as MP for Derby North between
2010-15. Williamson returns to the role of Shadow Fire Minister he held
under Miliband until his frontbench took a rightward turn with the
[October 2013
reshuffle](http://www.leftfutures.org/2013/10/ed-miliband-shifts-leftwards-at-conference-but-rightwards-in-the-plp/).
This role, then part of the Communities and Local Government brief
(responsibility in government for fire services was transferred to the
Home Office in January 2016), has arguably taken on a renewed importance
since Williamson last held it with the re-affiliation of the Fire
Brigades Union in 2015 and the ongoing role of the emergency services in
debates around Grenfell and public sector pay. For those unfamiliar with
Williamson his recent [wide-ranging *Novara*
interview](https://youtu.be/8xxcC7Uy-V4?t=12m19s) and [*LabourList*
article](https://labourlist.org/2017/07/chris-williamson-labours-team-can-come-together-around-jeremy-corbyns-opposition-to-austerity/)
on his appointment are a good starting point, and offer a firm riposte
to anyone who doesn’t strongly support the aim of electing more left
MPs.

Imran Hussain, MP for Bradford East since 2015, is another solidly
pro-Corbyn MP, having nominated him in the 2015 leadership and served in
the shadow International Development team since early 2016. A barrister
by profession, he fittingly joins the shadow Justice team.

New Intake
----------

Excluding those MPs who returned to Parliament after a period away like
Williamson and Drew, three members of the new intake have joined the
shadow ministerial ranks with these changes: Paul Sweeney, Afzal Khan
and Anneliese Dodds.

Paul Sweeney, seen as on the soft-left, has been appointed to the Shadow
Scotland Office team, joining fellow new MP Lesley Laird. Some activists
on the left of Scottish Labour are disappointed that the more pro-Corbyn
Danielle Rowley has been overlooked. Sweeney was among the signatories
of a [June 2016
letter](http://labourhame.com/scottish-labour-members-call-for-corbyn-to-go/)
calling on Corbyn to resign. His first parliamentary intervention of
note was to sign Chuka Umunna’s [divisive and pointless
amendment](https://twitter.com/oidptg/status/879610401847205888) to the
Queen’s Speech, calling for the continuation of Single Market and
Customs Union membership, in contravention of the clear position of the
election manifesto. He failed to vote for the amendment however, and was
likely to have been among the group of [“new MPs who are strongly
Pro-European”](https://www.facebook.com/LloydRussellMoyle/posts/1886882108192239)
that met with Shadow Brexit Secretary Keir Starmer and were seemingly
assured of the party’s position that “outcomes and not the structure”
should be emphasised in the negotiations.

Anneliese Dodds, who served as an MEP from 2014 until her election to
the Commons, joins John McDonnell’s shadow Treasury team. While she was
not the left’s preferred candidate for the vacant safe seat of Oxford
East, her selection was warmly greeted by the local Momentum group and
she might reasonably be described as on the ‘left of the soft left’.
While her experience will likely provide valuable insight into the
Brussels perspective on Brexit, Dodds’s appointment also makes sense on
policy grounds as the author of a well-received [report into tax evasion
and avoidance](http://www.anneliesedoddsmep.uk/my_report_on_tax_justice)
and with experience of sitting on the EU Parliament’s influential
Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee.

Another ex-MEP, Afzal Khan, becomes Shadow Immigration Minister under
Diane Abbott. This appointment was greeted with justifiable concern
given his background as a former policeman, his close ties to Andy
Burnham and [bizarre and frankly disgusting association with estate
agents](https://pbs.twimg.com/media/DD0LR_SXsAEe-bL.jpg:large) during
the election campaign.

The Left behind
---------------

A number of left MPs remain on the backbenches. It remains to be seen
whether new members of the PLP on the left such as Laura Pidcock and Dan
Carden will be elevated - the official press release announcing this
week’s changes points to further appointments “in due course”.
Irrespective of this reshuffle and any further ones, it is crucial that
the profile and platforms of these young, socialist MPs are built up if
we are to strengthen Corbynism within Parliament but also help create
new socialist voices that are comfortable and confident in communicating
Corbynism in their constituencies and in the media.

While it is essential that the front bench is filled with as many MPs as
possible supportive of the Corbyn project, backbenchers are able to
avail themselves of certain policy avenues closed to shadow ministers,
such as sitting on select committees. These committees largely toil away
in obscurity, but can play an important scrutiny function and
occasionally make significant policy interventions. As such these spaces
should not be vacated entirely to moderate Labour MPs. See for example,
the platform given to prominent anti-Corbyn voices such as Hilary Benn
and Yvette Cooper due to their chairships of the Brexit and Home Affairs
committees respectively. Their media appearances, often ostensibly to
discuss issues with the remits of their committees, almost invariably
stray into different territory, including their tired brand of
unthinking anti-Corbynism. The full memberships of these committees are
determined by party whips so it may be incumbent to place some of the
less experienced left MPs on those committees whose remit overlaps with
key aspects of the Corbynite agenda such as Education, Treasury and
Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy.

Beyond this these MPs may seek preferment for parliamentary private
secretary (PPS) roles which may help them build both understanding of
policy and relationships with the shadow front bench and the leader’s
office.

The full set of appointments
----------------------------

Where specific roles have later been confirmed this has been noted.

### Environment, Food and Rural Affairs

Farming and Rural Affairs: David Drew Flooding and Coastal Communities:
Holly Lynch

### Home Affairs

Security: Nick Thomas Symonds Fire and Emergency Services: Chris
Williamson Immigration: Afzal Khan Policing: Louise Haigh

### Scotland

Paul Sweeney

### Justice

Gloria di Piero Imran Hussain

### International Development

Roberta Blackman Woods

### Transport

Rail: Rachael Maskell Shipping, Aviation and Road Safety: Karl Turner

### Treasury

Anneliese Dodds

### Housing

Tony Lloyd Melanie Onn

### Women and Equalities

Carolyn Harris

### Defence

Gerald Jones

### Local Government

Yvonne Fovargue

### Education

Early Years: Tracy Brabin

### Wales

Chris Ruane
