The Ends of Austerity: Reflections on the 2017 UK General Election and its immediate Aftermath
==============================================================================================

by [Everyday Analysis](http://everydayanalysis.com/)

In the United Kingdom, the ends of austerity have been served, although
– despite its final whistle ostensively being blown – its end is nowhere
really in sight. Between the 2016 Brexit referendum and the 2017 general
election there was a change in the rhetoric of the government. The blame
game played against ‘the previous Labour government’ seemed to drop out
of the discourse somewhat, and the triumphalism of the ‘austerity
measures’ message went quieter under the exchequer chancellorship of
Philip Hammond, who replaced George Osborne in Prime Minister Theresa
May’s cabinet, built up in the stead of David Cameron’s resignation
after a 52% majority called for the country to leave the European Union.

On 18 April, May called a general election for 8 June, looking to
strengthen a mandate for a ‘hard Brexit’, the cards of which – as the
result showed – had not been played anywhere near right, in having been
kept too declaratively close to the chest for the talked-up
‘negotiating’ chips to have seemed anything more than a bluff; in the
end, the only indication of its terms and timbre were three colours,
meaningless to anyone without a pronounced case of imperialist
synaesthesia. May said: ‘we want a red, white, and blue
Brexit’.[^post-34-1] The hot air fuelling the Brexit balloon was an
anthem of anathema to the two percent less than half of voters who
plumped to remain in the EU, not to mention whatever compunction was
felt by voters for ‘Leave’ after the fact of the referendum, all of
which was quantified to some extent immediately afterwards, although
such ‘Bregret’ could really make no qualitative difference, at that
stage.[^post-34-2]

The election returned a hung parliament – after the support for Jeremy
Corbyn’s Labour party surged – the subsequent denial of which led to an
all but ungoverned period, in which the Queen’s Speech necessary to
inaugurate the new parliament was in suspension, whilst an immensely
unpopular £1billion deal was being brokered with the Democratic Unionist
Party of Northern Ireland, an ironic development after May’s repeated
mantra on Brexit: ‘no deal is better than a bad deal’.[^post-34-3] It is
now widely accepted that May – leader of the Conservative Party (a party
recently restored by her to its full official title, the Conservative
and Unionist Party, in a speech which sought to lay the basis for a deal
with the DUP) – took a gamble when she called the general election, and
that this gamble badly misfired. At the same time Conservative
strategists also took another gamble, and one which to them did not look
like a gamble at all, when they sought to fight the campaign on the
grounds of party leadership, emphasising May’s ‘strong and stable’
credentials (a phrase almost as self-parodying as her other,
tautological refrain: ‘Brexit means Brexit’) against Jeremy Corbyn’s
perceived weakness and unpopularity as Labour leader.

At first, this seemed to be a winning formula. At the start of the
election campaign, widely-reported polls gave May an enormous lead
against Corbyn on the key question of who would be the best prime
minister (e.g., ft.com’s of March 29; independent.co.uk’s of April 11).
The Conservatives made the assessment that since Corbyn was ‘unpopular’,
and since his politics appeared to them entirely wrong-headed, all they
needed to do was hold him up to view and the electorate would continue
to turn away from him. The calculation seemed to be that the more Corbyn
was seen, the less support he would attract. (A similar line was taken
by a great deal of the supposedly more left-leaning commentariat, the
faux-humility of whom for getting their takes ‘wrong’ being really just
a cover for their attempting to derail Corbyn’s, Momentum’s, and the
Labour membership’s project from the start, in favour of the
‘aspirational’ mid-nineties ethos that they were desperately trying to
preserve at all costs).

The Conservatives therefore launched a series of US-style attack ads,
largely through social media, targeted at Corbyn and his closest allies,
with the aim of drawing ever more attention to him (it cost them over
£1m, whereas Momentum spent about £2,000 on their social media for
Labour; the irony – as Matt Zarb-Cousin pointed out – being that the
Conservatives’ most organically shared video was likely East Yorkshire
MP Greg Knight’s promo, and this due to its parodic, sub-par(tridge)
jingle[^post-34-4]). It is the certainty with which the Tories adopted
this policy that is most striking. Just a week before the election, as
signs of Labour’s increasing support were starting to show, the BBC
could still run a report containing the claim by Tim Bale, Professor of
Politics at Queen Mary, that ‘targeting Corbyn’s leadership is a
no-brainer’.[^post-34-5] The Conservatives’ analysis continued to tell
them what they already knew: Corbyn was a weakness to be exploited. The
right-wing press agreed, running headlines such as the Sun’s
now-infamous ‘Don’t Chuck Britain in the Cor-Bin’ effort, published on
polling day itself.

Yet the Labour campaign also put Corbyn centre-stage, alongside the
party’s unapologetically socialist manifesto. In a series of
well-attended rallies, Corbyn spoke to thousands of people across the
country, with these events giving rise to the now ubiquitous chant of
‘Oh Jeremy Corbyn’, sung to the tune of ‘Seven Nation Army’ by The White
Stripes. In producing a chant that was simply the leader’s name repeated
again and again, the crowds responded to Conservative attacks not by
resisting, but rather re-emphasising the attention which the right had
turned upon Corbyn. Semi-humorous social media movements, such as the
prominent Grime4Corbyn campaign and hashtag, followed the same pattern.

The Conservative Party gamble had resulted from an assumption so basic
it barely needed articulation; that anyone looking at Corbyn would see
what the Conservative Party saw, a man constitutionally unfit to govern.
We can detect here signs of what the psychoanalytic theorist Jacques
Lacan calls méconnaissance, a form of misrecognition that is
fundamentally narcissistic.[^post-34-6] In turning attention onto
Corbyn, the Conservatives misread their own particular perspective as a
general one, failing to recognise the possibility that by displaying
Corbyn they might help open the door to alternative ways of perceiving
him. In doing so, they displayed a characteristic typical of the
centre-right, which always wants to present its views as pervasive and
obvious, a position from which it can claim to represent society in
general. From the start, the right presented its image of Corbyn as the
only credible one, and ended up being taken in by its own rhetoric
(which it barely recognised as rhetoric). The possibility that people in
any significant numbers might vote for Labour not despite but because of
Corbyn was unthinkable. In this act of méconnaissance, and in the
failure of the unacknowledged Conservative gamble, we can see the basis
on which the right has established its entitlement to govern fraying at
its ends.

And yet it clings on to this supposed entitlement with every last fibre
of its stiff little fingers, after an election in which the electorate
(once again) returned a hung parliament. This time, however, there was
no ready coalition to be built on the basis of a ‘moral majority’, made
up (we could stop there) of Tory votes and Liberal Democrat turncoats. A
lesson has not only been learnt by, but taught to, the Lib Dems,
although too lately realised (not least by ‘tactical’ voters in
constituencies that previously had Lib Dem MPs, in a good cross-section
of which Labour’s vote share was seen doubling and beyond, as it was in
the Tory heartlands and safe seats, making everything to play for),
causative of this current stalemate. It is to the DUP that the Tories
have turned, a phenomenon that in itself raises an interesting parallax,
another moment of Lacanian *méconnaissance*. In Lacan’s theory, the
destabilising figure of the other is not only found outside oneself (as
gets exploited in so many instances of stoked-up resentment and
xenophobic scapegoating), but precisely *within*. The other is
‘something in you more than you’ as he put it (the instance of which he
enigmatically labelled the object a). The reaction against the DUP and
its puritan principles, as perfidious as these might be in practice,
highlights a moment of recognition of the unsuspected, the unconscious;
a return of the repressed. Contemplating Northern Ireland – so little
thought of by the ‘mainland’ consciousness before this turn of events,
and its peace now in risk of being torn to pieces – brings home
something uncanny: not only the odiousness of the DUP’s retrogressive
politics (as devolved as it is) being so nearby, but the condensation of
the *Britishism* that so much of the ConDem and straight Tory
governments have based their ethos on, and what close ties there are
between the two. The half-baked Corbyn smears regarding the IRA become
exposed as incitements in this their mirror-image, as May’s Conservative
Party expends the remnants of its already-exhausted credibility as an
independent arbiter in the stalled Stormont Assembly talks. It is the
flippant disregard for, and likely lack of knowledge of, a very troubled
political process and its history that, for the sake of political
point-scoring and vote-courting, is playing with fire.[^post-34-7]

Where, we might feel entitled to ask, does this combination of
persistent, though now threatened, austerity and structural
*méconnaissance* lead? On 14 June, in the borough of Kensington and
Chelsea, a massive fire spread unconquerably fast through the Grenfell
Tower block of flats, its recent aesthetically-concerned refurbishment
with outer cladding having fallen far short of fire safety ensurement
(as has now been found to be the case in every other instance of
similarly-cladded tower block that’s been tested), but not of building
protocols and regulations, recommendations for the tightening of which
had been repeatedly on the desks of MPs in the Conservative government
(72 MPs of the Tory party voted against making social housing humanly
habitable[^post-34-8]), despite the tower’s residents having
perseveringly written to the property’s landlords about the
issue.[^post-34-9] In the disaster’s coming the day after Prime Minister
May touted a weasely and obviously opposition-vote-courting slogan,
‘austerity is over’ (which she’s repeated since with other
faux-concessions, the latest being the suggested slashing of tuition
fees), the ends of austerity – the *movement of public money into
private pockets*, in Mark McGowan’s phrase – have begun to show up their
very means materially.

In response to this horrific event, this article’s title – ‘the ends of
austerity’ – is a phrase that looks two ways (unlike ‘Brexit means
Brexit’, which looks only at itself). It both acknowledges the tentative
potential indicated by June’s election for a way out of the post-crash
economic consensus relentlessly pursued by Osborne, Cameron, and May
(which can only viably be brought about by Corbyn and the Labour party,
to whom it is understood, rather than viewed only as a possible inroad
to more power), and it recognises the destructive and divisive results
that this consensus has inflicted upon the UK. In Grenfell Tower, these
two strands – the failure of the current system and the call for
something different – come together. We should recognise, though, that
the call for change came not only after the fire, but before it, and
that the rejection of the residents’ requests is of a piece with the
failed cladding, whose purpose was not only to insulate the homes of
residents, but to insulate the perceptions of other inhabitants and
visitors to Kensington and Chelsea against the poverty and inequality in
their midst. Like the belated recognition that the DUP and Northern
Ireland are not somehow outside UK politics but sitting awkwardly at its
centre, the Grenfell fire is an uncanny return of the repressed in which
the other is revealed as already here, sitting amidst the wealth of the
London property boom.

In the case of Grenfell, the ends of austerity were supported by a
structure of repression that produced and maintained something like an
automated insensitivity; bureaucratic, faceless, grey. This
insensitivity continues to be pervasive, in evidence not only in May’s
initial decision not to meet survivors of the fire, the failure of the
local council to manage donations from members of the public, and their
many other failures,[^post-34-10] and now no repeal of cuts to the
emergency and other essential services, but also in the automated fabric
of the very online media landscape which alerted many to the fire in the
first place. One demonstration of this automation is indicated in a
tweeted advertisement for Hellmann’s, utterly inappropriately timed
(which can only be a realisation beyond automation), which ran the
tagline ‘London, it’s time to get grilling’, and which was swiftly
condemned by Twitter users:
![edanalysis](/Users/joe/Projects/nsbooks/what-sort-of-victory/data/edanalysis.PNG)

What the responses to this PR failure indicate – many along the lines
of, ‘Did nobody think to stop this advert going out?’ – is that
insensitivity has become structural: the default position is that the
tweet goes out, that the drive towards consumption goes on, and that the
capitalist imperative thereof is completely divorced from the events of
‘current affairs’, as if these were domains that are entirely
unconnected. This begins to entail that in a certain sector an active
effort is required not to disregard what has happened, not to continue
to repress and misrecognise what has happened, its opposite having
become the structural norm to an extent: that of insensitivity towards
the catastrophes of late, and their consequences, and precedents, as
found in the disingenuous calls not to ‘politicise’ or ‘hijack’ a
declaredly political tragedy (declared as such by the directly affected
themselves). Insensitivity, it is seen here, as one of the ends of
austerity, has become interwoven into the fabric of certain media, and
bureaucratic organisation, and their means of dissemination. It is the
breaking down of which that we are in hope of finally being at the
beginning of. Active recognition is needed now more than ever, as is the
pressing questioning of the repressions, ideologies and acts of
méconnaissance that structure our current conjuncture’s political life.

DB, BM

[^post-34-1]: See Jessica Elgot, ‘Theresa May calls for ‘red, white and
    blue Brexit’’,
    https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/theresa-may-calls-for-red-white-and-blue-brexit.

[^post-34-2]: See, for example, Nicole Morley ‘Number of people who
    regret voting Leave is greater than Brexit victory margin’,
    http://metro.co.uk/2016/10/16/number-of-people-who-regret-voting-leave-is-greater-than-brexit-victory-margin-6195403/.

[^post-34-3]: See, for example, Peter Dominiczak, ‘Brexit: Theresa May
    tells EU that ‘no deal is better than a bad deal for Britain’’,
    http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2017/01/17/brexit-theresa-may-tells-eu-no-deal-better-bad-deal-britain/.

[^post-34-4]: See Ben Kentish, ‘Tories ‘spent more than £1m’ on negative
    Facebook adverts attacking Jeremy Corbyn’,
    http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/conservative-social-media-strategy-attack-jeremy-corbyn-labouir-twitter-facebook-video-stormzy-akala-a7784406.html,
    and Ashitha Nagesh, ‘Tory candidate’s campaign video makes us
    believe in politics again’,
    http://metro.co.uk/2017/06/06/tory-candidates-campaign-video-makes-us-believe-in-politics-again-6688819/.

[^post-34-5]: See Sam Bright, ‘The rise of Tory attack ads on Facebook’
    http://www.bbc.com/news/blogs-trending-40059846.

[^post-34-6]: In *Seminar I*, Lacan describes this kind of
    misrecognition as ‘not quite a lie, it is somewhere between an error
    and a lie.’ See Jacques Lacan, *The Seminar of Jacques Lacan, Book
    I: Freud’s Papers on Technique, 1953-1954*, ed. by Jacques-Alain
    Miller, trans. by John Forrester (Cambridge: Cambridge University
    Press, 1988) p.265.

[^post-34-7]: An excellent outline of which can be found in Rosa
    Gilbert, ‘Northern Ireland, The DUP and Colonialism’,
    https://newsocialist.org.uk/northern-ireland-the-dup-and/.

[^post-34-8]: See Frances Perraudin, ‘Tories reject move to ensure
    rented homes fit for human habitation’,
    https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/12/tories-reject-move-to-ensure-rented-homes-fit-for-human-habitation.

[^post-34-9]: This post from the Grenfell Action Group lists ten ‘links
    to previous blogs \[…\] posted on th\[e\] site trying to warn the
    Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea, who own this property, and
    the Kensington and Chelsea Tenant Management Organisation who
    supposedly manage all social housing in RBKC on the Council’s
    behalf’ of the very dangers that led to the devastating fire, all of
    which ‘fell on deaf ears’:
    https://grenfellactiongroup.wordpress.com/2017/06/14/grenfell-tower-fire/.

[^post-34-10]: See, for instance, Chloe Cornish and Andrew Jack,
    ‘Kensington council sidelined after faltering Grenfell relief
    effort’
    https://www.ft.com/content/cb002c7a-5419-11e7-9fed-c19e2700005f?mhq5j=e1.
