Fascism without Borders: Britain and the BJP
============================================

by [Shruti](https://twitter.com/salem_steel)

In May 2015, as campaigning for the general election in Britain was
underway, a flyer surfaced online urging “Dharmic voters” (a catch-all
term intended to encompass Hindus, and those who the Hindu Right sees as
part of its religious “family”, including Sikhs and Jains) to vote for
the Conservative party. The document accused Labour and the Liberal
Democrats of branding every “Dharmic” person “today and forever as being
born casteist”, and exhorted members of those religious communities to
vote Conservative,the only party willing to not pursue the matter of
including caste as an axis of discrimination in the Equality Act 2010.

This ought not to be too surprising, given that in 2015 the Conservative
government was already voicing discontent with anti-discrimination
legislation they were mandated to enact under European law (a prelude to
the Brexit that was to come), and that the most vocal opposition to
anti-caste legislation has often come from the demographic of wealthy or
middle-class upper-caste British-Indian votes they have sought to woo.
In 2015, British-Indians were a key voting bloc for the Conservative
Party, with an estimated 615,000 migrant Indian voters in the UK, and
1.4 million people of Indian origin living in the UK. This group has
historically voted Labour – but the Tories have made significant inroads
over the years, and by the election in 2017, a post-election survey
showed that the Tories enjoyed an 8% advantage over Labour among British
Hindus and Sikhs.

It is easy to see why – for one, Corbyn’s social democratic offer
alienated aspirational middle-class Indians; Theresa May has repeatedly
emphasised the importance of India as a trading partner; and Corbyn has
long been a supporter of the Dalit rights movement in the UK, and serves
as honorary chairperson of the Dalit Solidarity movement. Further,
Corbyn supported a motion in the House of Commons that called on the
Secretary of State to reinstate a ban on the then-Gujarat Chief Minister
(now India’s Prime Minister) Narendra Modi’s travel to the UK, given his
alleged role in and failure to prevent the communal massacres of 2002
that claimed the lives of over a thousand Muslims in the state of
Gujarat (including British nationals) and displaced thousands more.

Still, the British-Indian love affair with the Conservatives was by no
means inevitable. Despite the ploys made by the Tories to scupper
anti-caste legislation, including Bob Blackman’s manifesto pledge to
keep it out of the Equality Act in the 2017 election campaign, the major
draw that Labour has held for middle-class Indians has been their
comparatively progressive policies on both race and immigration, areas
normally key to a migrant community’s vote.

Several Labour Party members have also extended a warm hand to Narendra
Modi – chief among them is Barry Gardiner, a man whose star has risen
among Corbyn supporters after his performance during the election, who
invited Modi to address the House of Commons, describing it as a
“culmination of several years of engagement between senior
representatives of the Labour Party and Modi”. Gardiner, in his role as
Chairman of Labour Friends of India, has been one of Narendra Modi’s
most vociferous champions and in an interview with the [Times of
India](http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Narendra-Modi-to-address-British-parliament/articleshow/21811288.cms)
he revealed a warm admiration for the man himself, describing him as ‘a
secular leader who has the overwhelming support of all communities in
Gujarat...proven time and time again in state elections". He added, "I
have met politicians from across the world and I rank him on the
pinnacle of all political leaders I have known. His competence to govern
is unbelievable."

During Modi’s state visit to Britain in 2015, several other senior
Labour MPs (Keith Vaz, Virendra Sharma, Seema Malhotra, and Steve Pound)
pledged to donate their pay raises to the dazzling event held at Wembley
Stadium with David Cameron, which was highly attended by the
British-Indian community. The three-day state visit resulted in more
than £9 billion in signed business deals, and David Cameron heralding a
“new and dynamic partnership” between Britain and India, one that was no
longer “imprisoned by the past”.

The visit certainly did mark a change from the days when the US had
repeatedly denied Modi a visa to enter, and the UK government had a
working policy to have no contact with the Gujarat state government,
over concerns regarding the bloodshed in Gujarat in 2002. The death toll
was estimated to be over 1,000 persons (over 2,000 by some other
estimates), largely perpetrated by organised groups of Hindus targeting
Muslims, often with the tacit or explicit support of state forces. Mass
rape, the burning alive of people, homes and small businesses, and the
widespread destruction of mosques raged across the state for several
weeks.

Modi has been widely held responsible by civil rights groups for the
Gujarat government’s failure to act swiftly to respond to the violence,
and the National Human Rights Commission reported numerous incidents of
state collusion and a refusal to pursue justice against the perpetrators
of violence. The state government steadfastly refused to pay
compensation to victims, or provide anything but the most basic of
relief to those displaced by the violence (of whom there were over
200,000) – many of whom have not returned to their villages or towns to
this day.

Narendra Modi has neither personally apologised for the violence nor
expressed any regret, and went on to appoint key figures accused of
instigating the violence to high-level government positions. When the
United States government under George W. Bush denied Modi a visa, citing
the National Human Rights Commission report on the 2002 violence, Modi
and his party reacted with outrage – variously labelling it an act of
“racism”, an “insult to the entire nation”, an “insult to the
Constitution”, and claiming it did not need “lessons in religious
freedom from anyone in the world”.

There are strong reasons to reconsider the reversal of this approach –
even if Modi is now the Prime Minister of the country, and even if he
was elected to that position. Since the ascendancy of Narendra Modi’s
party, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), to power there has been a
growing climate of hate and fear that targets marginalised groups,
silences those that dissent from the government’s enforced jingoism by
branding them as “anti-national”, and further emboldens the militant
Hindu fundamentalist elements within the party and their ferociously
anti-Muslim politics.

To those who know the origins of the BJP and its ideology, this will
seem an almost natural outcome of their politics – they are linked to
the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), a Hindu nationalist group whose
founders consider Indian national identity to be narrowly identified
with Hindu culture and beliefs: religious minorities must pay allegiance
to the Hindu nation and refrain from practicing their faith in the
public sphere.

Not much has changed for the contemporary avatars of Hindu nationalism.
It remains a project committed to reducing religious minorities to
second-class citizens, consolidating a muscular iteration of what it
sees to be “Hinduism” (often a distillation of upper-caste practices and
beliefs) through a cultural and electoral absorption of castes and
tribes that have historically been excluded from Hinduism. The results
of this are visible nearly everywhere across the country today – mob
lynchings of Dalits and Muslims are on the rise, often accompanied by
allegations that the victims were are carrying beef or transporting
cattle for slaughter (as the cow is considered by some Hindus to be a
sacred animal); the state gives credence to spurious claims that
inter-religious marriages are a plot by Muslim men to “steal” Hindu
women and there have been numerous attacks on non-governmental
organisations and universities that criticise the government.

In January 2015, Priya Pillai from Greenpeace India was scheduled to
travel to London to testify on the effects of Essar Energy’s mining
before she was deplaned. The Indian government claimed that she was not
allowed to travel as her testimony would project a “negative” image of
the government at an international level – never mind that the abuses of
the UK-registered coal mining company were being inflicted on its own
indigenous citizens. It later emerged that the Central Government had
also had a hand in events at Hyderabad Central University where a Dalit
student who was involved in student politics, Rohith Vemula, was
stripped of his scholarship and subjected to institutional persecution
until he committed suicide in January 2016. The then-Minister for Human
and Resource Development had received a letter accusing the student
group of engaging in “anti-Hindu” activities and it was this that led to
the suspensions. Subsequent events at Jawaharlal Nehru University in
February 2016 advanced this assault on students – after student groups
held protests to mark the hanging of Afzal Guru, a Kashmiri separatist
who the state claims had a hand in a 2001 Parliament attack though this
has been widely disputed, three students were later arrested and charged
with sedition for allegedly shouting ‘anti-national’ slogans.

For those who believed that Modi’s affiliation with the RSS, which began
in his boyhood, would be tempered by high office, that the moderate
elements in his party would win out, or even that the trend to
authoritarian religious nationalism would be a price worth paying for
economic progress and development – none of these promises have been
borne out.

The debacle that was “demonetisation” (an overnight move taken by the
Government that rendered 86% of currency notes invalid) has had
lingering financial effects; surveys have indicated that unemployment is
at a 5 year high; whilst investment in improving social welfare and
government employment schemes has so far been negligible. For all the
bluster of the government, their constant unveiling of new plans and
slogans, there is only so much that can distract from the ground reality
of economic pressures – religious polarisation and jingoism can only
carry them so far electorally. And yet, this is precisely the strategy
they are employing. In a move that stunned many, Yogi Adityanath was
made Chief Minister of India’s most populous state, Uttar Pradesh, in
March 2017 – Adityanath is a man widely seen as representative of the
most violent elements of the BJP, having been involved in drives to mass
“convert” religious minorities to Hinduism, engaging in murderous
anti-Muslim rhetoric, and calling on the Indian government to adopt a
ban similar to Trump’s ban on citizens from 7 Muslim-majority countries
from entering the country.

Under ordinary circumstances this should be more than enough to give
pause for thought, but not in the post-Brexit era. Britain is desperate
for allies outside Europe for the uncertain years that lie ahead, as was
made clear when Theresa May made her first trade mission visit to India
in November 2016. In many ways, the Conservative Party has made its own
compromises with the far Right in the United Kingdom – adopting its
racist and xenophobic line on migrants, refugees, and asylum-seekers –
and British governments have hardly minded turning a blind eye to the
actions of its friends in the past. But the sanitisation of Hindutva (as
Hindu nationalism is called by its adherents) in British politics marks
a dangerous turn – far from being uneasy bedfellows, it marks a
willingness to completely disregard all prior apprehensions about
Narendra Modi’s record to leap into trade arrangements and business
deals.

The controversy around the inclusion of caste in the Equality Act also
demonstrates that Hindutva has a role to play in British politics too:
in consolidating an identity around Hindus, Jains, and Sikhs, and in
opposing mechanisms of justice being made available to Dalit and Bahujan
diaspora by calling caste a product of colonialism and arguing that
legislating it would entrench it. Besides, Hindutva groups are active in
the British-Indian community beyond lobbying against anti-caste
legislation – the Hindu Swayamsevak Sangh (HSS) is the overseas wing of
the RSS and is a UK-registered charity, and the Hindu Student Council
has a similar ideological outlook. The HSS was investigated for hate
speech by the Charity Commission after a speaker engaged in anti-Muslim
and anti-Christian rhetoric at a camp, and has been told to distance
itself from the RSS. Meanwhile, Priti Patel has openly expressed her
admiration for the RSS and Narendra Modi’s “vision”, whilst Bob Blackman
has publicly attended HSS events where the RSS chief, Mohan Bhagwat, was
in attendance. The international wings of the RSS actively fundraise and
funnel their money into their activities, fuelling their campaigns of
religious communalism including military training for their recruits in
camps that teach them to fight for the “Hindu nation”.

The untrammelled rise of Modi to power has meant that he has received
little international scrutiny for either his actions or those committed
and enabled by his government, party, and groups affiliated to it. If
Corbyn’s Labour party is serious about furthering transnational
solidarities based on social and economic justice, they must refuse to
engage in the cynical electoral and economic ploys of the Conservative
Party. Opposing Modi’s government, questioning his human rights record,
and continuing to support the struggle to enact anti-caste legislation
must form part of a singular strategy to combat a government that
enables and intensifies the persecution of minorities – this is the
internationalism needed in this era to counter fascism.
