Class Power and Red Robbo
=========================

by [Jack Saunders](https://twitter.com/jack_saundrs)

The death of car worker, trade union activist and Communist Derek “Red
Robbo” Robinson last month at the age of 90 did not make an especially
huge splash in the national media. For a while, only the BBC West
Midlands broke with the story, before eventually obituaries began to
trickle into the broadsheets. Yet Robinson remains one of very few union
activists of that period widely remembered by the British public.
Mention the industrial unrest of the 1970s to people of a certain age
and a sizeable proportion will mutter “Oh yeah, Red Robbo and all that”.

It is a peculiar collective memory. The other figures that my parents’
generation retain from that era are almost all general secretaries –
Jack Jones, maybe Hughie Scanlon. Certainly Robinson was heavily
demonised in the media at the time, but he was far from the only
workplace activist to receive similar treatment in that period. The
British popular press in the 1970s was an endless parade of evil car
workers, miners, hospital workers, electricians, posties and rubbish
collectors, all apparently responsible for Britain’s downfall.

Indeed, Robinson was very far from being Britain’s most disruptive shop
steward. News of his death was accompanied by the eye-catching claim
that Robinson had been responsible for 523 strikes during his five-year
tenure as convenor of the Longbridge Works Committee. This claim,
originally made by the man who sacked him, Michael Edwardes, Chief
Executive of British Leyland from 1977 to 1982, is wholly implausible to
anyone with a passing knowledge of industrial relations. In reality,
from the 1950s onwards Longbridge had a pattern of endemic industrial
conflict in which small, short strikes, organised autonomously by work
groups, were a feature of daily life, largely outside of the control of
senior stewards like Robinson.

More often than not, as factory convenor, Robinson found himself in the
role of mediator, attempting to persuade groups of irritated workers to
resume production after something had provoked a stoppage. Interviews
with workers and managers alike remember Robinson as a conciliatory
figure, doing his best to balance defending workers’ rights with the
need to maintain continuous production and keep the struggling firm
afloat. As one co-worker, a fellow toolmaker, put it in 1981, “until his
dismissal Derek Robinson was hauled out of bed on numerous occasions by
the company, ‘Can you go back Derek, the men are preparing to walk out.
Can you go back, and try and prevent it.’ And Derek Robinson used to get
out of his bed at 2 and 3 o'clock in the morning, go into that factory
and reach agreement with the men.”

Robinson’s sacking centred not on him disrupting production but on his
co-authoring of a critique of the Edwardes Plan, a company document
aimed at rationalising British Leyland at the cost of tens of thousands
of jobs. Reducing the authority of the unions within the company was
deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the scheme and sacking the
best-known shop-floor leader was a sure-fire way of putting everybody on
notice. Robinson’s later demonization as a strike-starter and
troublemaker was part of a search for a post-hoc justification sturdier
than sacking a man for signing a document.

Later the myth of Robinson as the ultimate troublemaker Communist shop
steward came to stand for the wider myth of Britain’s 1970s as an
endless cycle of wanton trade union wrecking. Just as Robinson’s
illusory 523 strikes apparently killed British Leyland, the unions were
responsible for leading Britain into decline, a decline in which the
motor industry, that quintessential sign of competitive modernity, was
itself a symbol. Both myths served to obscure a wider point about the
period, that the increase in industrial militancy was driven not by
union barons or by politically-motivated militants, but by levels of
organisation and dissatisfaction within the workplace. Robinson was
frequently called back to work in the early hours of the morning because
night-shift workers, with no reference to their leaders or officials,
regularly organised spontaneous walk-outs. Management called Robinson
because the collective power of those workers meant they had to be
persuaded rather than disciplined back to work.

Similar omissions mark most popular accounts of the 1970s, which usually
look upon union militancy as something initiated by the unions as
institutions, rather than as something produced by working-class people
within their workplaces. As a result, “the unions” retain their place in
our national demonology without the demonisers having to bear the taint
of having attacked “ordinary working people”. The mythology of that
period can locate the seeds of decline in “bad unions” and the
politically marginal people who bore formal authority within them,
without reminding us of the social power that some of the organised
working class bore in that period. Political discourse in the 1970s and
beyond set about teaching Britain that collective direct action stems
not from our grievances but from the manipulations of outsiders, a
lesson a generation learned so well that even with Derek Robinson’s
death, the myth of Red Robbo lives on.
