Corbynism from Below at The World Transformed
=============================================

We are delighted to announce the details of *New Socialist's* session at
[The World Transformed](https://theworldtransformed.org/), which will
take place on Tuesday September 26th at 1pm at the [Synergy
Centre](http://www.thesynergycentre.org/).

Our session ‘Corbynism from Below’ will focus on three critical goals
for the movement: building community and workplace solidarity;
democratising and opening up the Labour Party so that it truly reflects
the needs and concerns of working and marginalised people; and
delivering upon the promise of Corbynism and Labour’s election
manifesto, both in and outside of government. Our panel will discuss why
these aims are vital to both the Corbyn project and the wider labour
movement, how we can make them a reality, and the challenges that will
confront us in our efforts to do so.

List of speakers
----------------

-   Dawn Foster, *Guardian* columnist
-   Tom Gann, Editor, Theory & Strategy co-editor, *New Socialist*
    (Chair)
-   Maya Goodfellow, Writer and researcher
-   Laura Pidcock, MP for North West Durham
-   Hilary Wainwright, Co-editor of *Red Pepper* magazine
-   Matt Zarb-Cousin, former spokesperson for Jeremy Corbyn

Speaker bios
------------

**Dawn Foster, Guardian columnist**

Dawn Foster is a *Guardian* columnist, writing on politics, economics
and social affairs. She has also written for the *London Review of
Books*, *The Independent* and *The New York Times* and is a regular
political commentator for Sky News, Channel 4 News, and Newsnight. Her
book, *Lean Out*, was published in 2016.

**Tom Gann, Editor, Theory & Strategy co-editor, New Socialist (Chair)**

Tom Gann is Theory & Strategy co-editor of New Socialist and has written
on Labour, anti-imperialism, housing and urban struggles for a range of
publications. Tom is a long-standing Labour member and stood for
Parliament in 2010. He has also been involved in housing struggles
across South London and successful trade union organising against
zero-hours contracts.

**Maya Goodfellow, Writer and researcher**

Maya Goodfellow is a writer and researcher. A regular columnist for
*Media Diversified*, she is a former staff writer for *LabourList* and
has also written for *the Guardian*, *the New Statesman* and *the
Independent*, among others. Her work mostly focuses on UK politics,
immigration, gender and race. She is also a doctoral candidate at SOAS,
University of London where she studies race and racism. She previously
specialised in conflict studies, primarily examining social movements.

**Laura Pidcock, MP for North West Durham**

Laura Pidcock was first elected as MP for North West Durham at the 2017
general election. Since her election she has joined the Justice Select
Committee and become Vice-Chair of the All-Party Parliamentary Group on
Mental Health. Before her election she worked as a mental health support
worker and for Show Racism the Red Card.

**Hilary Wainwright, Co-editor of *Red Pepper* magazine**

Hilary Wainwright is a Fellow of the Transnational Institute and
co-ordinates the European dimension of its New Politics Project; a
founding editor and current co-editor of *Red Pepper*; and an active
member of Momentum Hackney. Her latest book is *A New Politics from the
Left*, forthcoming. Her other books include *Reclaim the State:
Experiments in Popular Democracy*; *Arguments for a New Left: Answering
the Free Market Right* and *Labour: A Tale of Two Parties*.

**Matt Zarb-Cousin, former spokesperson for Jeremy Corbyn**

Matt Zarb-Cousin is a former spokesperson for Jeremy Corbyn, and since
leaving the leader's office has written for *the Guardian*, *the
Independent*, *Jacobin* and *Vice*. He is now spokesperson for the
Campaign for Fairer Gambling, which campaigns against Fixed Odds Betting
Terminals.
