Austerity is not Gender Neutral
===============================

by [Labour Women Leading](https://twitter.com/labourwomenlead)

Austerity is not gender neutral. The Labour Party’s analysis indicates
that 86% of the burden of austerity since 2010 has fallen on women; not
only through attacks on services for women and girls such as those
experiencing domestic violence, but cuts affecting all aspects of
women’s lives.

Tory policies have left many women in dreadful situations – unable to
make their wages stretch far enough, they are forced to turn to
foodbanks in ever higher numbers. School holidays mean holiday hunger
for many families. Many women, some juggling caring for children and
supporting older relatives with multiple paid jobs, are exhausted. Women
are left with no choice but to stay in exploitative relationships
because they have nowhere else to go. Women at university are in huge
debt, while WASPI women are plunged into poverty. Hate crime such as
Islamophobia is on the rise, leaving BAME women facing multiple forms of
discrimination and oppression.

[The UN’s recent
findings](https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/aug/31/un-panel-criticises-uk-failure-to-uphold-disabled-peoples-rights)
that the government was guilty of “systematic violations” of the rights
of people with disabilities should have been a catalyst for positive
change, but the Tories have simply dismissed them. In contrast, the last
Labour Party manifesto offered real hope to millions of women, with
transformative policies. A £10 per hour minimum wage, investment in
housing and childcare provision, and bolstering rights at work are
policies which would change many people’s lives for the better. Ending
student fees and lifting the public sector pay cap would enable women to
reach their full potential, and to continue to continue to play a vital
role in public services, after their tireless efforts in the forefront
of the fight against austerity.

There is a huge surge of interest in politics, with the Labour Party now
the largest left-of-centre political party in Europe. People want to be
involved, to campaign and to build a more just society. Ensuring that
women from all backgrounds are heard, and that their priorities are
central to debate, is essential. This not only benefits women, but the
whole movement. Not all Labour Party structures yet facilitate
engagement and support people in their efforts to be more active, but
members are now demanding change to ensure that the party becomes
genuinely democratic - and they are organising for that change,
including through initiatives like Labour Women Leading

We are however profoundly disappointed that the arrangements for this
year’s Labour Party’s Women’s Conference have been badly communicated.
It does not have the resources and standing that it needs. It cannot
consider resolutions and has no mechanism to impact on the main
conference. We hope that this will be addressed next year and that Jean
Crocker and Teresa Clark - both of whom are also backed by both Momentum
and the Campaign for Labour Party Democracy - are elected to the Women’s
Conference Arrangements Committee to help ensure this happens.

The NEC’s recent decision to make nearly 50 of Labour’s top target seats
women only shortlists is great news. The left now has to provide support
and encouragement to women who will argue for policies which address the
core concerns of women in those constituencies and across the country.
The recent general election saw some outstanding women elected, and they
need to be joined by many more. If this opportunity is not taken, we
will let down the millions of women who need urgent and radical change.

Our politics looks to tackle economic injustice, to engage with people
living on working-class estates, trapped in insecure work, and who feel
that they have been ignored too often by politicians of all parties in
the past. Women now make up the majority of Labour’s supporters, and
their voice matters. Under Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership, party policies
have broad popular appeal. We need to involve women in campaigning and
to empower them to take up leadership roles at all levels.

A number of activists who support the party’s policies have been
developing the Labour Women Leading network, to enable women to share
experiences and provide mutual support. Critically, we want to ensure
that women understand party structures and can play a full role across
the movement. A very successful event was held in the spring, and there
will be a fringe meeting in Brighton over conference weekend, with
leading women MPs and trades unionists speaking.

Change is in the air across Britain. Women are currently involved in
disputes such as the BA Mixed Fleet, the McDonald’s strike and the
campaign against the public sector pay cap. We have a proud history of
tackling sexism and discrimination in our movement, and we are fighting
to ensure that before long there will be a Labour Government in power
which will deliver genuine empowerment, justice and equality.

*Labour Women Leading’s fringe meeting will take place from 5.30 pm till
7.15 pm on 23 September at the Brighthelm Centre, North Road, BN1 1YD.
Speakers include MPs Diane Abbott, Cat Smith and Emma Dent Coad as well
as former NUT general secretary Christine Blower, barrister and activist
Liz Davies and Labour NEC member Claudia Webbe.*
