Wages4Housework and Beyond
==========================

by [Nadine Houghton](https://twitter.com/nadinehoughton1)

At a recent meeting discussing a Universal Basic Income, one of the
speakers expressed surprise that women (who still carry out the largest
share of domestic and reproductive labour in the home) would demand a
wage for their work, his assumption being that our work was a labour of
love.

With my new baby strapped to me I was feeling the sharp end of the wedge
of reproductive labour. It hadn't occurred to me that people on the left
still saw the invisible, unpaid work carried out in the home as not
deserving of a wage - or to put it more strongly that the workers
carrying out that work (predominantly women and mothers) are not
justified in making demands for a wage. 

As Silvia Federici says in *Revolution at Point Zero*, 

> The unwaged condition of housework has been the most powerful weapon
> in reinforcing the common assumption that housework is not work, thus
> preventing women from struggling against it, except in the privatized
> kitchen-bedroom quarrel that all society agrees to ridicule, thereby
> further reducing the protagonist of a struggle. We are seen as nagging
> bitches, not as workers in struggle [^post-7-1].

It is undoubtable that Jeremy Corbyn's recent success marks the biggest
step forward for the left in a generation and with that a great advance
for women's rights. There is so much in the manifesto that will improve
the lives of women in the workplace, in education, in healthcare and in
the home. Yet, there are still many more demands that women can and
should be making on the Labour Party.

The Wages for Housework campaign led by feminists in the 70's was an
attempt to politicise domestic labour, to frame a demand that's natural
conclusion was the necessity of women's collective struggle. It rightly
sought to identify women's role in the home as unrecognised,
uncompensated labour. If the very existence of capitalism is dependant
on this labour (the creation and raising of new workers, the care and
servicing of current workers) it wasn't simply the men on the factory
floor that needed to organise against their exploitation but the women
in the kitchen too.

Times have clearly moved on and it's fair to say that the situation for
women now is less restrictive. However [the recent debate within the
Labour Party around a Universal Basic
Income](http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/economy/2017/07/could-labour-implement-universal-basic-income) has
once again brought the idea of Wages for Housework to the fore. 

Removing what is often seen as a binary decision between work at home
and work outside the home - we should be demanding a system whereby the
situation is more fluid and women and parents have the ability to
fluctuate more easily between the two with an acknowledgment that when a
parent is at work inside the home it is still just that - work, that
their role should not be diminished in any way simply because they are
not employed. I'm sure I'm not alone in feeling a sense of the work I do
at home as being invisible to the rest of the world. Whether or not the
Wages4Housework demand is deemed realistic, the cornerstone of the
demand and one that deserves a hearing is one of validation for the role
of unpaid labour. 

The shape and semantics of the demand - whether we call it
wages4housework or a basic income are almost less important than what
the demand represents, because the natural consequences of raising it
address the structural impact of unpaid domestic labour on women working
outside the home. Such a demand should be linked to the experiences of
low paid women - not simply as a tool for solidarity but as a practical
organising tool that shifts the debate around low pay to a clear
analysis of class, race and gender. 

You are more likely to work in a low paid job if you are a working class
woman, this increases if you are a woman of colour and/or migrant
worker. While there are various structural, historical and economic
reasons for this, one over arching theme is that women's work is often
seen as an extension of the unpaid work women do in the home - child
raising, caring, cleaning - if it's unpaid in the home why should it be
highly paid outside of it? The two are inextricably linked. A
wages4housework demand is not some lofty, ideological, outdated,
feminist demand - it is directly rooted in one of the causes of low pay
for women in today's society. 

Think of the role of the women working at the Ford Dagenham car plant
that went on strike to demand equal pay. Their work at the plant was
portrayed as inconsequential, little more than what they already did in
the home, a little bit of sewing - until they organised collectively and
their strikes brought production to a stand still. The diminished role
of women in the home reinforces the view that it's somehow ok to
continue this exploitation in the workplace, until that is, we use our
collective strength to arrest this view.

The Labour Party manifesto addresses the dire, low pay that paid carers
of children receive, it also commits to a £10 per hour minimum wage and
improvement of collective bargaining rights, which are all of course
needed to address low pay. However what it doesn't fully address are the
conditions which force many women into low paid jobs - a more radical
approach to childcare and better employment legislation are necessary,
but so to is addressing the role of women in the workplace being seen as
an extension of their role in the home and therefore of less monetary
value.

The manifesto, rightly commits to professionalising the role of early
years children's carers, this approach needs to be extended to all
caring roles. The last Labour government introduced the Schools Support
Staff Negotiating Body which aimed to offer schools support staff
(overwhelmingly a female workforce) similar national bargaining rights
to teachers (currently support staff pay and conditions are determined
at a local level causing fragmentation) helping to professionalise the
role. Jeremy Corbyn's Labour have committed to re-introducing this, but
to go a step further we could build a job evaluation system that values
the role of affective labour. Knowing that my son feels loved and cared
for when he goes to school is just as important to me as whether or not
he can read and write. We could eventually consider similar arrangements
for those that care for the elderly depending on the shape our social
care system takes under a Labour government.

The role of domestic, catering or retail staff needs also to be elevated
and their importance honoured, acknowledging and elevating these roles
in the home as well as the workplace. Take for example a hospital, it is
the cleaners and hostesses who are paid the least and are most poorly
treated, yet they provide the foundation for the whole running of the
hospital. A dirty hospital can't keep a patient free from infection and
good food supports recovery. 

The recent heroic struggle of Serco workers at St. Barts hospitals shows
what can be achieved through mass collective struggle, breaking down the
legislative barriers that make this sort of action (currently) difficult
to organise would make it easier for women to self organise against low
pay.

These struggles will inevitably elevate both societies view of low paid
women workers but more importantly will impact on the way that women
workers view themselves and their own ability to capitalise on their
collective strength (as previous mass action led by women has shown us)
- the growth in the confidence of working class women, the disputes we
will lead and the gains we will win will have a direct impact on the
strength of our future demands. 

But to ensure our collective strength is not diluted, the struggle in
the workplace and the one in the home must be linked. Whether it is the
Focus E15 Mums demanding better housing, the Ford Dagenham strikers
demanding equal pay or the Dockers wives organising a rent strike in
support of their striking husbands - there are concrete lessons we can
learn. Our task now is to seize the opportunity that Corbynism presents
us.

[^post-7-1]: Silvia Federici, Revolution at Point Zero: Housework,
    Reproduction and Feminist Struggle, Oakland, PM Press, 2012, p. 16.
