'A Bold and Radical Shift': Richard Leonard and Scottish Labour
===============================================================

by [Lauren Gilmour](https://twitter.com/_vermilion10)

It has been a turbulent decade for the Scottish Labour Party. Since
2007, the party has gone from being the dominant force in Scottish
politics to being the third party, behind the Conservatives. This
article comes at a time when Scottish Labour is at a crossroads and it
is once again tasked with choosing the direction it goes in.

In choosing Richard Leonard in the upcoming leadership election,
Scottish Labour would break away from the idea that workers are
constituents to be protected from the worst excesses of predatory
capitalism and move towards the idea that they can be active agents of
change. This is the major shift that the Scottish Labour Party needs and
not simply the bland protectionism that is being offered by Leonard's
opponents. A Richard Leonard-led Scottish Labour Party would be a
victory for the left; not just in Scotland, but across Britain too.

Who is Richard Leonard?
-----------------------

A representative of the Central Scotland region, Leonard has been a
Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) for just over a year. Before he
announced his candidacy for the leadership of Scottish Labour, he did
not even possess a Twitter account. Outwith the Labour and trade union
movement, he has a relatively low profile. This may traditionally be
seen as a detriment, but with a reputation as tarnished as that of
Scottish Labour, having a low profile may be seen as a benefit.

For over twenty years, Leonard has been a trade union organiser: his
most recent position before becoming an MSP was political officer for
GMB Scotland . He has been involved in a variety of causes of the left
over the years and is considered to be an intellectual and ideological
heavyweight within the Scottish left. A protégé of communist academic
John Foster, Richard Leonard has played an important role within the
left in Scotland, often at crucial times in its recent history.

Leonard is a strong performer when it comes to policy, industrial
strategy and economic change. His politics centre on economic, social
and political transformation. Throughout the Scottish Independence
Referendum in 2014, he was fiercely anti-nationalist and was not
involved with the jingoistic and deeply conservative Better Together
campaign, preferring instead to talk about returning power to the
people:

> > “Let me start with a gentle reminder. Our goal in this movement is
> > not and has never been about shifting power from one parliament and
> > one set of politicians to another. Our goal is about shifting power
> > from those who own the wealth in this country back to those, who
> > through their hard work and endeavour create the wealth in this
> > country.”[^post-8-1]

Leonard’s views (shared by others) were, at the time, sadly overlooked
in favour of the overtly British nationalist messages that the Better
Together campaign was spinning. Had the Scottish Labour Party run its
own distinct campaign in the independence referendum, then perhaps it
would not be in a situation today where it has only 7 MPs in
Westminster.

Throughout his tenure as an MSP, however, Leonard has been far more
cautious. He has been a quiet supporter of Jeremy Corbyn throughout his
term so far, signing an open letter in support of him, along with Neil
Findlay, Elaine Smith and Alex Rowley, but has rarely made a show of it.
He has been reluctant to associate himself with the left-wing Campaign
for Socialism (CfS) group, despite their growing influence and support
within the party.

Leonard is, however, firmly committed to the ideas, policies and
ideology of the left, and to running as the left’s candidate. He would
bring a sense of optimism and change to a party that has been doing the
same things for too long and yet expecting different results.

How can Leonard win?
--------------------

The Labour Left in Scotland has been revitalised and rejuvenated. This
process began in late 2014, where the left-wing group Campaign For
Socialism (CfS) played a high profile role in organising MSP Neil
Findlay's Scottish Labour Leadership election against Jim Murphy. Whilst
Findlay did not win, his campaign brought together a group of young
activists who were inspired to start a movement campaigning for change
within the youth wings of Scottish Labour (and beyond), now known as
Scottish Labour Young Socialists. His campaign also built the
foundations of a revitalised left that, in 2015, began winning internal
political positions such as the National Policy Forum slate. For the
first time in many years, a left-wing majority made up the Scottish
Young Labour executive committee. The Corbyn campaign in 2015 (and 2016)
also brought back many people on the left who had previously felt
abandoned by the Labour Party.

Richard Leonard’s campaign is taking on the Scottish Labour
establishment and machine. However, there is still a very good chance
that he could win; according to the bookies; he is the current
favourite. His leadership will be just that: leadership. It will focus
on radical and bold ideas, including public ownership, industrial
strategy, investing in public services and ending austerity. These, he
stated in a [Sunday Mail
article](http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/politics/who-replace-kezia-dugdale-richard-11103572)
earlier this month, are not ideas he has adopted for current
convenience, but beliefs he has held throughout his time in the labour
movement:

> > “These are not new ideas to me. They brought me into the Scottish
> > Labour Party over 30 years ago and guided my work as a trade union
> > organiser across Scotland for 20 years.”

Leonard’s campaign, much like Corbyn’s in 2015, has started with little
more than a website and a Twitter account. For many, this is the moment
they have been waiting for. The 2013 Collins Review infamously
implemented a system of electing a Labour leader that was intended to
stop a left-wing candidate from even getting on the ballot, let alone
winning the entire contest. But the opposite outcome was ultimately
delivered due to the creation of the affiliated and registered
supporters categories, enabling people to sign up for £3 to get a vote
in the leadership election. While Corbyn would have won the contest
without this quirk, it was registered and affiliated supporters that
turned his leadership victory into a landslide, , handing him close to
60% of first preference votes.

The same thing could theoretically be replicated in Scotland, if the
same drive and ambition to secure a leader who will deliver a change in
direction exists. Like Richard Leonard, we must be audacious in our
drive to win this leadership contest. From stalls to sign up people in
the street, to social media campaigns targeting the young people who
voted Labour for the first time in this year’s general election, we must
ensure that we have a comfortable majority of people who want a new kind
of politics reflected in the Scottish Labour Party.

A Leonard-led Party
-------------------

For too long, the Scottish Labour leadership has focused on endless
'gotchas' directed at the SNP. Their political arguments have lacked
substance. To start reigniting the interest and the trust of Scotland,
Scottish Labour must position itself as a genuine alternative to the
SNP. Richard Leonard's political outlook will deliver this much-needed
departure from the bland, centrist, social democracy that has
characterised both the SNP and the Scottish Labour Party since
devolution. Instead he will transform the Scottish Labour Party into a
party that talks about economic and social injustice, and how that can
be changed. Richard Leonard will implement a far more ambitious
industrial strategy than the current leadership or the Scottish
government. This would bring much-needed jobs and investment to
Scotland.

The crucial difference between a Sarwar-led Scottish Labour Party and a
Leonard-led party is their position in relation to workers’ relationship
to capital. This is the fundamental shift that needs to take place
within the Scottish Labour Party. Leonard offers a bold and radical
shift away from social democratic protectionism, towards a parliament
that puts power back in the hands of the people. If the members of
Scottish Labour choose to put their faith in Richard Leonard as leader,
it will be the another step towards an essential left-wing shift within
the party.

[^post-8-1]: http://redpaper.net/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/RedPaperLabourVoicesMay2013\_A4.pdf
