Paul Sng interview - Dispossession: The Great Social Housing Swindle
====================================================================

“Every time I see a person in a cardboard box in London,” Tony Benn once
told parliament, “I say, that person is a victim of market forces.” He
explained that, “I do not share the general view that market forces are
the basis of political liberty.”

Until Jeremy Corbyn’s election as leader of the Labour Party in
September 2015, the type of scepticism towards markets articulated by
Benn was not abundant in British political life. The process of
neoliberalisation that began under Margaret Thatcher (or, arguably, Jim
Callaghan) restructured the economy to centre it around private
enterprise, increased competition, and reduced collective bargaining; an
economic model which lumbered on untrammelled under successive
governments, Conservative and Labour. In the throes of the “End of
History”, there was never a choice. Market-based reforms were spun as a
political and economic necessity.

The housing sector has been at the heart of this marketisation of public
services. In Paul Sng’s new documentary *Dispossession: The Great Social
Housing Swindle* (in cinemas now) he interrogates the ways in which the
actions of central government, local authorities and the private sector
have intersected to transform the UK – in fewer than four decades – from
a country freshly revelling in the joys of home ownership, to a country
where homelessness has risen for six consecutive years, and it’s harder
than ever to find a home to live in, let alone own.

*New Socialist*’s Culture co-editor Jack Frayne-Reid spoke to Sng about
the difference (or lack thereof) between regeneration and demolition,
the creative process behind political filmmaking, the contradictions
between Jeremy Corbyn’s radical left movement and Labour at the local
level, and how we should look at social housing in the wake of the
Grenfell Fire.

**NS: Would you say Dispossession…’s primary concern is the
marketisation of housing, and that it’s of the perspective that housing
is a human right?**

PS: I would say that is the key focus of the film; the fact that council
housing and social housing – housing full stop – is now determined by
market forces. But really the film is about value and community, and how
the value that’s placed on people who live in social housing has
decreased over time. That goes back to the last few decades where in the
arts and media we’ve gradually seen the stigmatisation – and even, in
some cases, denigration – of people that live on council estates. You
turn on the TV on any morning or evening, switch on Channel 5 or even
Channel 4, and all you’ll see is these “poverty porn” shows like
*Benefits Street* and *Council House Crackdown*. I think that’s really
helped the private housing market, because nobody really seems to want
to live in council housing, because they seem to think that it’s somehow
for people that are undeserving or haven’t really “made it” in life.
That certainly wasn’t the intention or the reality back in the 50s, in
the 60s and even the 70s, but over the last three or four decades the
desired tenure of home ownership has just increased and increased and
increased. It’s kind of like a perfect storm for council housing, and
people that haven’t really wanted to have government support for it. The
Tories have been cutting investment in social housing for years and, on
council housing, didn’t have an iron-clad agreement with the Treasury to
replace what was sold off during Right to Buy. So I don’t think there’s
any one cause for the housing crisis, but certainly the way the market
and private landlords have been allowed to run away is a major cause.

**You say that the demand for home ownership has gone up and up and up.
Do you think that with the precarity of the housing market, it’s still
going up, or are people placing more value in simply being housed,
rather than necessarily owning their own home? Do you think that maybe,
perversely, because of the instabilities created by these market forces,
that maybe that craze for home ownership might be on the wane?**

Yeah, it’s so expensive to own a home, and we’ve seen recently the big
estate agents like Foxton's have seen – I think– a 64% reduction in
profits, so clearly home ownership is becoming out of reach for the
current generation of people in their thirties and younger. But, I mean,
where do they go? Because they can’t get a council tenancy. Finding
secure, affordable, stable accommodation in any major city in this
country is incredibly difficult, and that puts the power in the hands of
the landlords. You saw last year where they tried to put through a bill
to make homes fit for human habitation [^post-9-1] and it was voted
down, mainly by Tory MPs, seventy-one of whom are landlords. Home
ownership has decreased, but I don’t think it’s because fewer people
want to own homes; I think it’s just out of reach financially.

**There’s quite a striking figure on the website of the film. In 1980,
when Margaret Thatcher’s government introduced the Right to Buy scheme,
42% of people lived in council housing. By 2017 it was an incredibly
marginal 8%. I was wondering if you could talk about the part housing
plays in the quite fundamental change over the last thirty years in the
very way our society is structured.**

It’s actually less than 8%. You can’t just blame the Tory government.
New Labour didn’t really do enough to fix the problem. They gave a lot
of power to housing associations, but they’ve not built in the quantity
that’s needed. I think it comes down to both the Tory government and to
a certain extent New Labour believing that the market would solve the
housing crisis, and I think that was very short-sighted. I think the
Conservatives see council housing as something that is akin to Accident
& Emergency: it’s something where you’ll end up there, and you’ll be
looked after. It’s not something they think people should desire or have
any great belief in wanting to actually attain, and I think that’s
wrong, because back in the ‘50s, the ‘60s, the ‘70s, and even the ‘80s,
it was designed for working class people or lower middle class people,
or people in jobs that didn’t necessarily pay big wages but were key
jobs: nurses, teachers, those kinds of jobs. I think the problem now is
that the Tories want to reduce council housing to a rump that will only
be for the people that are desperate. And they’ve got similar plans for
the NHS, haven’t they? So I think that’s an issue that, if you’re doing
alright, if you don’t live in council housing, then you’re not going to
particularly care about, but if you’re somebody that lives in it or
would like to have the benefits of a lifetime’s tenancy…

I think, essentially, that New Labour also saw council housing as
something that was akin to Accident & Emergency at a hospital. The
problem with that is that, if you reduce something like council housing
to a rump, you then put all your faith in the private rental market or
housing associations, and neither of those have been able to provide
secure and stable accommodation The relative ease with which the Housing
and Planning Bill became the Housing and Planning Act – with very little
public interest compared to the junior doctors’ strike or the Iraq War –
shows you the lack of interest in council housing, because I think we’ve
all been conditioned to see it as something for people who are really
desperate, and that nobody would ever choose to live in. I think the
problem with that is that there are people who work in key service
industries – whether that’s nurses, people who are starting out in
teaching, or people who work in the service industry – that need places
to live and, if they’re having to spend between fifty and seventy
percent of their wages on being housed, it doesn’t create a very fair
society.

**Can you elaborate a bit on the contents of the Housing and Planning
Act?**

The government claimed it was designed to address the housing crisis,
but I think it was really designed to enable people to own homes,
because that’s where they see their votes as being. The reason the
Tories brought in the Right to Buy policy was to win working class
votes, because they knew that people who lived in council housing
generally voted Labour, so that’s why we were then stuck with the Tories
for another seventeen years after that. But in terms of the Housing and
Planning Act, I think we won’t know the full extent of some of the
things it’s introduced until maybe later this year, and then it’ll be
ongoing, because it was very much I think a kind of Frankenstein’s
monster of an act – various bits of previous policy ideas taken from
here and there. But in terms of what it does to end lifetime tenancies,
for instance, I think it’s very bad, because that affects families.

For instance, in the film there’s a woman called Rhonda Daniels, who’s
got a brother who’s got severe autism. When their mother eventually
goes, that flat will be taken away. It’s very worrying in terms of
people who’ve got children or vulnerable adults to look after. It was an
act designed to enable people to own homes and it doesn’t do very much
for council housing, and there are concerns from people like Shelter
(the anti-homelessness charity) that it’s going to take away more than
one hundred thousand council homes in the end.

**How do regeneration and redevelopment factor into the wider narrative
about the housing market put across in your film? And how do you think
we should reflect on this in light of the Grenfell fire, which seemed to
bring together a lot of these concerns about market forces failing
people in the grotesque way possible?**

I think regeneration, which really means demolition, is a very complex
subject. There are certainly going to be estates that need repairs, and
in a lot of cases these estates have been allowed to fall into those
states of disrepair through a process of managed decline. Council
tenants and leaseholders pay service charges, council tenants pay rent,
and a percentage of that money is ringfenced by local authorities to pay
for refurbishment and repairs. So, in the case of some estates like
Cressingham Gardens or the Aylesbury Estate where they’re saying “look,
it’s going to cost too much to repair the estate so we’re going to have
to demolish it and build a new one” – that’s a bit of a swindle if
you’ve been paying money towards that for however many years. The case
of the Heygate Estate is a prime example of where regeneration has had a
very negative impact: about 1000 homes on the Heygate Estate were
demolished, and 2,704 new ones were built – but only around 80 of them
will be available for social rent.

That’s pretty disgusting, really, when you look now at what that estate
has become. It’s called Elephant Park. The reason that local authorities
do this is that they don’t have very much money, they’re in debt, so
they think that by building a new development, including social housing
but then also having some private housing for sale, they can pay down
debts. You can understand why they would do it, but what actually
happens is it’s de facto social cleansing, especially when you don’t let
the estate’s original residents come back. It happened on Balfron Tower,
when (housing association) Poplar Harca received the building when it
was stock transferred from Tower Hamlets, and, as you saw in the film,
they evicted the tenants and didn’t let any of them back, and now it’s
being sold as luxury apartments.

So the problem with regeneration is that it actually means demolition,
and there are alternatives. People have proposed building on these
estates – in Cressingham Gardens they proposed a plan where they would
build more social housing, at a fraction of the cost of what Lambeth had
planned, but that plan was ignored because Lambeth need to make money by
selling luxury apartments to pay off debts. It’s there in their accounts
– you can see how badly their accounts have been managed if you Google
something called [Lambeth Audit](http://www.thepeoplesaudit.info/). It
was a report into the mismanagement of Lambeth’s finances, and it’s
shocking reading. That’s a council that’s just announced that the cost
of its town hall is currently £104 million, and this is a borough that’s
got 14,000 people on the housing waiting list. So, as councils go,
Lambeth are pretty shocking. Again, it’s run by the Labour Party, and it
seems to me to be unaligned with what Jeremy Corbyn is saying about what
Labour would do in government.

**A lot of councils are. There seems to be this wider dissonance between
Labour at the local level and the leadership.**

Yeah, it’s massive. It’d be good if the Labour leadership would speak
out on that. Obviously there’s a need for Labour to try and maintain
unity and be seen as a unified party to get into government, but I do
think we need to hear from Jeremy Corbyn about what he thinks is
enabling the social cleansing of working class areas in London. I’m sure
he’s not happy about it, and I know he’s been told about it. His brother
(Piers Corbyn) is a prominent housing campaigner who’s urged him to get
on the estates and make his voice heard but for whatever reason he’s yet
to do that. I think he would give the people on these estates who are
fighting to save them a lot of hope. A lot of people look up to him and
respect him and I don’t think he can be happy about it, but he hasn’t
said anything, and the silence is beginning to become deafening.

**He was very well received when he went to Grenfell in the aftermath of
the fire, wasn’t he? Especially in contrast to Theresa May.**

Exactly. I’m not a Labour voter – I live in Brighton, my MP is Caroline
Lucas – but I do think Jeremy Corbyn is a principled and decent man. I
don’t agree with everything that he says but he is somebody that, when
he says something, you do believe him. I think he’s a man of principles.
It would be nice for him to speak out about this stuff, but this is
where we are. We’ve also written to him to ask him to watch the film. He
wasn’t able to make a screening; he’s obviously very busy but I’m
hopeful that he will watch the film and then engage with some of the
issues in it.

**You managed to get Maxine Peake to narrate the film.**

Yeah, Maxine’s great. If she’s free, hopefully she’ll come along. I’m
surprised Jeremy Corbyn hasn’t watched it yet as because I think he’s
friends with Maxine, so I might have to ask her if she’ll have a word
with him and see if he’ll take a look at it.

But, going back to Grenfell, I think it has made the film more relevant.
The people in Grenfell were not valued by their council and that’s why
so many of them lost their homes and however many of them died – we
obviously still don’t know the figure. But those people weren’t valued;
they were seen as not worth investing what would’ve been probably a few
extra thousand pounds in cladding or materials that would’ve saved their
lives – a sprinkler system or whatever else. And that is the problem
with council housing up and down the country; that the people who live
in it are not valued by local authorities or central government. They
make a lot of noise about these things, especially in the wake of
Grenfell. You see MPs like David Lammy, who lost a friend of his in the
fire, making a real noise about it, which I think people need to do. But
in David Lammy’s own constituency, he did very little to stop the £2
billion Haringey development project that’s going ahead. He wrote a
letter at the eleventh hour – where was he two years ago when that
campaign were crying out for him to do something?

**I think he was very moved by losing his friend, so it was kind of an
emotional reaction for him. He’s never come from a particularly radical
tradition in the Labour Party – I think he’s had, one could say, a bit
of an awakening since suffering that horrible loss. However, it’s
positive, isn’t it, to see MPs who you’d almost think of as kind of
Blairite like Lammy taking these issues seriously, even in the most
appalling of circumstances? But from the right-wing Labour MPs and
councillors who simply have a lot of faith in markets, to the leadership
who, like you say, have not been particularly vocal on these issues,
there is a kind of cross-Labour complicity in these problems. Do you
think there is a similar level of cross-party complicity?**

**I was struck by your interview with Nicola Sturgeon, where she gave
these quintessential politician’s answers – very careful not to
criticise anybody or criticise the policy in question, perhaps because
everyone is a bit guilty of it. And maybe that’s a reason why you don’t
hear Jeremy Corbyn turn his fire on the social cleansing, whatever you
wish to call it, that’s going on on councils’ watch; because he knows a
lot of them are his own people and with regular local elections he
doesn’t want to be seen to attack Labour’s electoral candidates. Do you
think this is a widely held feeling across politics?**

Oh, definitely, but Jeremy Corbyn wants to do politics differently,
doesn’t he? He made a big thing of “the kinder politics” and how his
whole MO is that he’s different. That’s why he appeals to people;
because he’s principled. You can see, throughout his career as an MP,
what he’s voted on, and the causes he’s supported; I see him as someone
who is very fresh. But my question is, is he having to make compromises
as a politician? I think he has to play politics now; he’s the Leader of
the Opposition. And I do get it. He’s in a very awkward position, but
the whole thing with Corbyn was that he’s different. And if he’s going
to become like the others…people have said to me, when he gets into
power, he’s going to fix those council houses – well, he might not get
into power and, when he does, he’s going to have to deal with the
aftermath of Brexit and God knows what else.

**Deep state interference. MI5 not being happy with a socialist
government. Just to get all “tinfoil hat” for a second. But
realistically that will happen.**

Yeah. And the thing is, the estates that are in need of support… a lot
of them will be gone by then. So the time is now for Corbyn to say
something. I don’t think it’d lose Labour the council in Lambeth – what
I think it’d do is reduce their majority a bit, maybe.

**Are you familiar with Labour’s Shadow Secretary of State for Housing,
John Healey?**

Yeah, he was invited to do an interview for the film, but his team
refused. Interesting, isn’t it? Gavin Barwell also refused, who was the
Housing Minister at the time. His team said “call us if you get a TV
commission”, but you don’t know that you’re going to get a TV commission
until you’ve made the film. So he dodged us too. And, obviously, Lambeth
Council dodged us. Poplar Harca dodged us. Whatever you say about Nicola
Sturgeon, she found the time and she’s the First Minister of Scotland,
so she’s easily the busiest person of the people we approached. Yet John
Healey couldn’t find the time.

**You interviewed Caroline Lucas as well, another party leader. I was a
bit critical of earlier in that she gave very, very diplomatic answers
regarding anyone who might be seen as complicit in these policies. But
you’re right, at least she did appear and put her case forward. John
Healey’s not from the Labour left – he seems to be a bit of a housing
specialist, to the extent that I’ve read that he’s kind of unsackable.
He resigned when the other sixty MPs did last year to try and get rid of
Corbyn, and then he just came back when Corbyn was re-elected, as if
they didn’t want to appoint anyone in his place. I’m not sure what it is
about John Healey that gives him this kind of iron grip over housing
policy in the Labour Party. But in terms of the people you talked to,
you did manage to get hold of a couple of Labour MPs, including Karen
Buck and Rushanara Ali.**

And Jim Fitzpatrick. They made themselves available. We would’ve got
(Shadow Education Secretary) Angela Rayner too but we had to reschedule
and she wasn’t able to make the second appointment, but she was willing
to talk, which was good.

**(Journalist) Dawn Foster is a talking head in the film, and is
compelling as always; particularly on so-called “sink estates”. What do
you think about this concept?**

It’s a horrible term, and it was one that Cameron, when he came out with
that statement about how they were going to fix however many “sink
estates” around the UK…people live on these estates, they’re homes first
and foremost, and to describe somewhere as a “sink estate” is not a very
nice thing to say, really. It also fits a convenient narrative where you
can demonise not only the estate itself, but the people who live on it,
because bricks and concrete don’t turn people a particular way in terms
of their behaviour; that’s society, that’s deeply ingrained inequality,
in areas that’ve been deindustrialised or areas where there may be high
rates of crime, but it’s nothing to do with the buildings themselves. I
think it’s a troublesome term, and it’s one the media just ran away with
and everything became about, “oh, it’s a sink estate!” And a lot of the
places are fine. St Ann’s in Nottingham, which is in the film, some
people might describe as a “sink estate”, but it’s a great place, it’s
got a great community, people there are really tightknit; close
together. It’s a media thing, really, I think, this “sink estate”
nonsense.

**You talk to a lot of residents – particularly in St Ann’s – who really
reject the way that their areas and their communities have been
portrayed by the media and by politicians. In St Ann’s they talk about
this great sense of community. So did you find it really interesting,
and also quite moving, I suppose, to go around to all these places and
meet the residents? In the estates you visit, such as Cressingham
Gardens or Central Hill, there are very strong communities, and people
feel like they haven’t been given a fair rap, that they’re under threat,
and that they’ve been neglected. In the film, the residents of Central
Hill estate in Glasgow talk about almost performative clean-ups of their
estate by the council, followed invariably by a rapid slide into
decrepitude.**

Lots of people have theories around that, and a lot of people think that
it’s deliberate neglect reason: some say so that when these estates fall
into a state of disrepair they can demolish them more easily, or when
it’s a whole area – as was the case with the Gorbals in Glasgow – they
can then redevelop it. The Gorbals is pretty much unrecognisable now
from what it was in the past. You’ve seen in the film that to rent a
flat there costs £600 a month, which people that had been to the Gorbals
back in the day would be really shocked at. You do have to wonder –
certainly in inner cities where estates are in areas near to good
transport links or to parks, like Cressingham Gardens is – why the
estate has been allowed to fall into what they say is a state of
disrepair. The people of Cressingham commissioned [their own private
report into it](https://savecressingham.wordpress.com/) and it’s not the
case that demolition is justified.

I think there is an agenda behind it – whether that agenda is driven by
what they ultimately see as altruistic motives is another question. I
think Lambeth would probably argue that they need to demolish the estate
to build more housing, to have greater density and help solve their
housing crisis. They’re not doing it from the point of view that they’re
just greedy or evil. It’s just the only way they feel they can solve –
or make inroads into solving – their housing crisis is by demolishing.
And that’ll be the case in other areas as well. Govanhill (in Glasgow)
is a very distinct area. There are efforts going into it, it’s just
they’re not good enough, and I think there needs to be more money spent
on education in that area because there is a high migrant population and
people coming from another country don’t necessarily know about things
like recycling and that there’s about bloody five different coloured
bins for various bits and pieces. The litter problem there is something
that could be changed by education and that means not just putting up
signs in English but putting up signs in however many different
languages you need to, and being able to communicate better with people
there.

**Do you think that’s a case of local government cutting corners and,
rather than investing more in making an estate more hospitable to people
from other countries for whom English isn’t their first language, being
prepared to just knock it down? But perhaps not entirely through
malicious intent – do you think there’s a case to be made that central
government offload many of the most grievous cuts to local authorities
in an effort to keep their hands clean?**

I think so. With the whole issue of council housing and the housing
crisis, I don’t necessarily think that there’s a group of shadowy men in
suits smoking cigars in some backroom, pushing it through, speaking to
their friends in the media to get them to stigmatise and demonise
council estates and the people who live on them. I think it’s just been
one thing after another that has created this situation, and it’s
created a perfect storm. When you’ve got the failure to replace the
housing stock sold off from Right To Buy, you’ve got the freedom that
the private rental market is given, that there aren’t enough regulations
on being a landlord, you’ve got the issue with wage stagnation, you’ve
got benefit cuts, austerity, and all of these things when you put all of
them together have made it nigh-on impossible for most people to get a
stable, secure, affordable home these days.

**You mentioned Ken Loach is presenting a screening of the film with you
in Bath. Is he an influence on your filmmaking?**

Oh, definitely – he’s someone whose films I’ve watched since I was a
kid. I saw *Kes* when I was about ten years old and cried my eyes out,
so it’s going to be a big pleasure to meet him tonight. He’s going to be
doing a Q&A panel with us after the screening, because we’re working
with some people up there on an estate called Fox Hill, which has been
given a demolition order by the housing association that owns it. Ken’s
supporting [the
campaign](https://you.38degrees.org.uk/petitions/save-foxhill-a-beautiful-housing-estate-in-bath),
and we’ve made a short film for them. It’s happening all over the
country – it’s ridiculous.

**I feel we’ve discussed the contents of your film but not really the
process behind it. Do you feel it’s a kind of straight agitprop film, in
that you can play it at activist events and tie it in with these local
campaigns? How do you approach being a director with political intent?**

It’s a big responsibility when you make a film about people’s lives and
the issues that are affecting them. The main thing for me is that these
are always human stories, and something that I was very mindful of when
I started making the film was that you have to earn people’s trust and
respect. You can’t just tip up on a council estate and get the camera
out and start filming. You’ve got to meet people. You’ve got to get to
know them a bit. So that’s something I’m always very mindful of.

My first film is about a band called Sleaford Mods (2015’s *Sleaford
Mods: Invisible Britain*.) It followed them on a tour of what later, I
suppose, became the Brexit heartlands, and other places, in the run-up
to the 2015 general election. That film was very much a polemic, and my
politics were very much at the fore in terms of my thoughts about
austerity and what happened with deindustrialised communities. But I
sort of realised that, with documentary filmmaking, you need to win
people over. It was very polemical, and I think that in some cases the
people that agree with you think “yeah, it’s a great film”, but you
don’t then connect to another audience that maybe would appreciate the
film, but because they see it as a polemic were immediately put off.

So I think it was really important with *Dispossession…* to tell a
balanced story. I mean, it would’ve been nice to interview a few more
Tories or people on the right but that didn’t happen. The main thing
about *Dispossession…*, one of its strong points, I think, is that it’s
a very balanced film. It’s critical of people on both sides of the
Houses of Parliament.

**That’s true, but without this kind of artificial balance that seeks to
draw a false equivalence between these ruinous right-wing policies and,
say, socialist or social democratic ones: it draws attention to the
inequities of the current system without claiming any alternative would
be equally disastrous. It’s not [*Newsnight* getting someone on to
defend Nazi protestors in
America](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gfNNN8Hhsok). It’s fair without
trying to shoehorn reactionary views in there to give an illusion of
balance.**

I think you’re exactly right with that. Having two polarised views isn’t
true balance, is it, really? It’s very difficult to get what people
would consider to be a fair balance of views, but having two people that
are exactly opposite doesn’t leave much middle ground. So I think what
we tried to do with the film was present a range of views. Primarily,
for me, the most important people in the film are the people that live
on estates; people that are fighting to save their homes or have already
lost them. I think they give the film its real point of interest, and
its soul in a way, because it’s great to hear from experts, whether
they’re politicians or people in the housing industry, but ultimately
you want to know the people who are affected by this; what they think.

**There are some moving stories in the film: the person who took
advantage of the Right to Buy and bought their flat, before
redevelopment was announced, leaving them as the sole resident of their
block of flats.**

That was Beverly. She bought the flat on the Right to Buy, then a few
months later found out the estate’s going to be demolished. They offered
her a paltry amount of money – something like £60,000 – for it; I think
the latest offer is £250,000 but it’s still short of what she expects
because for £250,000 you’re not going to get a two-bedroom flat anywhere
in Southwark. You’re looking at £450,000 plus for that. If she wants a
two-bedroom flat she’s going to have to move to somewhere like
Manchester; out of London definitely. There are places in the UK,
particularly places in the North of England, where you can buy houses
really, really cheaply; you can get a house for fifteen, twenty grand.
But if an area’s been deindustrialised; if there aren’t jobs, there
aren’t very good public services there, you wouldn’t want to live there.
That’s the crisis: it’s very acute.

*Dispossession: The Great Social Housing Swindle* will be in cinemas
throughout September, October, November, and will be screened at The
World Transformed on September 26th from 5:30 pm - 7:15 pm.

[^post-9-1]: Sng refers to the Homes (Fitness for Human Habitation) Bill
    2015/16, introduced by the Labour MP for Westminster North, Karen
    Buck – who is interviewed in the film – in order “to amend the
    Landlord and Tenant Act 1985 to require that residential rented
    accommodation is provided and maintained in a state of fitness for
    human habitation; and for connected purposes.”
