Football from Below
===================

Mark Perryman of [Philosophy
Football](https://www.philosophyfootball.com/) explores the
possibilities of fan culture as a social movement.

During the international break a mini-spat over the England players’
pride, or lack of, in wearing the three lions on their shirt provided a
helpful starting point towards the remaking of football as a social
movement. Explaining England’s inability to go even 1-0 up against the
proverbial minnows of the Maltese football team until well into the
second half has a lot less to do with the lack of emotional commitment
from Harry Kane et al to end now the more than half-century’s worth of
years of hurt than their actual inability to play. ‘Pride’ is the easy
cop-out, what we’re actually witnessing is the ever-decreasing quality
of English football. How many of England’s starting eleven would Paris
Saint German be chasing after with their chequebooks, or Barcelona and
Borussia Dortmund be in the market for after their most talented players
have been sold off? Of course the best eleven England can put on a pitch
isn’t all bad but mostly their talent is boosted at club level by
playing alongside foreign, more technically gifted and able players. On
their own they’re not half as good. And for the players who turn out for
United, City, Chelsea, Liverpool and Spurs a World Cup Qualifier, and
short of reaching the long-forgotten semi-final stage, the tournament
itself, doesn’t come close to being the biggest match of their careers
compared to the more realistic chance, until recently at any rate, of
Champions League glory. It gets worse, the enormous wealth the Premier
League provides to their clubs means even for those players far away
from making it into the Champions League, the season-long battle to
maintain that status pushes England games pretty far down their, and
their coaches, list of priorities. Arguably we might even stretch this
to securing promotion from the Championship (sic) to the Premier League
too.

Lack of passion? No, the result of commercial calculation. This is at
the core of the sickness of what football has become, the hopeless
confusion of mistaking the richest league in the world with being the
best. It’s no accident that the Championship play-off final is described
almost exclusively in terms of the riches awarded to the victor rather
than the quality of the football played.

For a period those disillusioned with the Premier League and all that
adopted the mantra ‘Against Mod£rn Football.’ We first turned this into
a T-shirt having spotted a Croatian Fans’ banner at Euro 2008 ‘ Against
Mod€rn Football.’ The sentiment was internationalist enough to make
perfect sense. But being ‘against’ is the classic oppositionalist
default position. A catchy phrase that fits neatly on to chest sizes
small-XXL but ‘Against Mod£rn Football’ is increasingly problematic in
three ways.

Firstly, there’s more than one version of modernity, is the ‘against’
aimed at the growth of women’s football, refugee leagues, a game without
borders, the irresistible plurality of where fans come from, race,
gender, sexuality and nationality divisions broken down? Being against
all that ends with oppositionalism masking conservatism, or worse.
Secondly the business of football has become inseparable from
multinational corporate power. The macro-politics to reform the game
traditionally adopted by both Labour and groups such as the Football
Supporters Federation means any agency to enforce these policies seems
almost impossible to imagine. Somehow I think an incoming Labour
Government is going to have more immediate issues on its mind than
nationalising the Premier League. Thirdly, therefore, there is a
necessity to reimagine fan culture not as hard-pressed consumers but as
a social movement with the capacity itself to make change.

Currently this is very much a minority movement, but all such movements
start out with big ambitions and modest advances. Their potential to
grow and effect change is dependent on the ability to inspire via small
victories which help convince wider forces this is a direction of travel
worth pursuing. We can see this in the rise of militantly anti-racist
ultra groups, at Clapton, Whitehawk and elsewhere. The growth of
start-up football clubs, Hackney Wick FC, City of Liverpool FC and the
women’s football club AFC Unity in Sheffield. The spread of community
ownership up and down the divisions. The pro-refugees message heard from
at least some stands, not on the scale of what was seen across the
Bundesliga but present nevertheless.

At the core of any such movement is gender. Recognising that if football
is to become modern for all then the sport’s entrenched masculinity has
to be challenged. Treating women’s football as different yet equal is a
key step towards a truly inclusive game. On this basis the Equality FC
initiative at Lewes FC where mens and womens playing budgets are the
same, is a model for all clubs to aspire to if the pressure ‘from below’
can be built.

This isn’t fantasy football. It is about the remaking of the political,
the recognition that it is in popular culture more than any other space
that ideas are formed, the limitations on what is possible challenged
and transformations take shape. Brighton, now a Premier League club,
playing in their own city, an ambition only made possible because of a
15-year campaign by their own fans is a vital illustration of this
possibility, a club culture absolutely framed by that fan-led campaign.
And it is fitting therefore that it is in Brighton at [The World
Transformed Festival](https://theworldtransformed.org) alongside Labour
Party Conference that many of those involved in these practical
initiatives will be gathered together by Philosophy Football [to launch
a
discussion](https://theworldtransformed.org/sessions/football-from-below/)
on what a ‘Football from Below’ might look like.

Any such discussion if it is to have a meaningful purpose demands
allies. Labour and the trade unions via such a dialogue will be forced
to address the narrowness of their own agendas and the scarcity of their
own alliances. Football is a signifier of so many other spaces in
popular culture where Labour and the trade unions need to be present, be
part of, connecting ideas to lived experience towards change. New Labour
adopted football in the same way it adopted Britpop as a cultural
accessory, providing photo opportunities and celebrity endorsements. A
flimsy appropriation out of a flimsy politics. Corbynism promises
something different, the framing of a popular, cultural politics will be
vital to any fulfilment of that proud boast. Football just one of what
should become countless journeys of putting the ideas of Corbynism into
practical extra-parliamentary achievement.

‘Football from Below’ wears the colours of FC St Pauli as our
inspiration. But it is time to make that change in our own image too.
From the bottom-up, not in opposition to those who choose to follow the
Premier League moneybagged bandwagon, that would be not only futile but
also self-destructive. Instead as a minority we will be pioneering the
practical possibility of building a game that doesn’t have to be run in
the way it is. Rethinking football as a sport for all not a business to
be run. Idealistic? Guilty as charged.

*Philosophy Football’s* Football from Below T-shirt is available from
[here](https://www.philosophyfootball.com/football-from-below-shirt.html)
