Building Platform Socialism: Beyond the Taylor Review
=====================================================

**[Justin Reynolds](https://twitter.com/justinlucent)**

The future of work has moved to the centre of mainstream political
debate. New forms of employment in the ‘gig economy’ engineered by
digital technology are opening questions about work’s [purpose and
meaning](https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/21/books-interview-david-graeber-the-utopia-of-rules)
that extend well beyond the parameters of a debate typically confined to
technocratic questions about the relative merits of programmes designed
to cut unemployment figures. And the prospect of a wave of technologies
[capable of
automating](https://www.technologyreview.com/s/603465/the-relentless-pace-of-automation/)
a vast range of jobs is generating a sense of insecurity intensified by
the [swirling uncertainties associated with
Brexit](https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/aug/03/bank-of-england-keeps-interest-rates-on-hold-despite-inflation-fears).

The labour market is trending rapidly towards less stable forms of
employment. Self-employment is [growing more
quickly](https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/aug/12/uk-self-employment-capital-western-europe-ippr-recovery)
in the UK than any other EU country, increasing by more than 1.5 million
since the turn of the millennium to 4.5 million, and now accounting for
more than 15% of the workforce. Some 1.7 million people are in temporary
jobs and around [1.1 million work are on zero-hours
contracts](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-40561807) (about the same
number as work in the NHS) a form of work that has grown by more than 70
per cent since 2010.

Radical solutions such as the introduction of a [basic
income](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basic_income) or [job guarantee
scheme](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Job_guarantee) have moved from the
confines of the seminar room and speculative texts to everyday political
discourse. Though proposals of this scope remain beyond the horizons of
possibility Theresa May’s government is prepared to contemplate, the
Prime Minister’s concern to position the Conservatives as the [‘party of
workers’](https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/theresa-may-conference-interventionist-government-for-workers)
following her Tory leadership pledge last summer to create a society
‘that truly works for everyone’, prompted the commissioning of a major
report, the *[Taylor Review of Modern Working
Practices](https://www.thersa.org/discover/publications-and-articles/matthew-taylor-blog/2017/07/the-taylor-review?gclid=EAIaIQobChMIt67Tipa91QIVqRXTCh0xoQt0EAAYASAAEgK5b_D_BwE)*,
which was published on 11 July after a 10 month review.

For socialists expectations for the Review were never high. Just a few
weeks after announcing the report last October the Prime Minister had
already stepped back from her intention to put employee representatives
on company boards, [telling business
leaders](https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/21/theresa-may-force-firms-appoint-workers-boards-cbi)
‘categorically’ that they would face no such obligation. The four member
Review was led by RSA Chief Executive [Matthew
Taylor](https://www.thersa.org/discover/publications-and-articles/matthew-taylor-blog),
the former head of Tony Blair’s Policy Unit. Other members included
an employment solicitor from a corporate law firm advising employers on
industrial relations, and a former Deliveroo investor. There was no
trade union or worker representation.

For Taylor, unsurprisingly given the Review’s provenance, Britain’s
flexible labour market - “the British way” - is something to celebrate:

> The starting point for our review has been the strength of our labour
> market and of the key features of our system of employment regulation,
> what we refer to as the British way. Record levels of employment, low
> levels of unemployment, high levels of voluntary flexibility, wages
> now growing fastest amongst the lowest paid; these facts provide a
> very positive backdrop – one that would be envied in many other
> advanced economies – for our consideration of how to improve the
> quality of work.

The Review cites surveys suggesting that self-employed people
are happier with their work than employees, that about two-thirds of
temporary workers choose those arrangements, and a similar proportion on
zero-hours contracts do not want fixed hours.

Nevertheless it does acknowledge that this new “voluntary flexibility”
is has not been welcomed by all, noting that only 65% of people think
their job is secure, that around six million people are not covered by
the standard suite of workplace rights, and that about half of the
self-employed are low paid - indeed some 460,000 are falsely classified
as self-employed by employers keen to avoid national insurance
contributions. The Review recognises that flexibility is a double-edged
sword:

One sided flexibility is when employers seek to transfer all risk on to
the shoulders of workers in ways which make people more insecure and
make their lives harder to manage. It is the people told to be ready for
work or travelling to work only to be told none is available. It is the
people who have spent years working for a company on a zero hours
contract but who, without a guarantee of hours from week to week, can’t
get a mortgage or a loan. It is the people who feel that if they ever
raise legitimate concerns about their treatment they will simply be
denied the hours they desperately need.

The Review is concerned that people have access to “good work”, for the
sake of the dignity and opportunities for self-development it affords,
and the importance of addressing the British economy’s chronic
productivity problem.

Most of Taylor’s recommendations are abstract, little more than a set of
aspirations for future consideration. The Review suggests, for example,
that a national strategy should be pursued to open good work for all
“for which government needs to be held accountable”. The government
should “explore ways of supporting and incentivising local authorities,
particularly city regions and combined authorities, to develop
integrated approaches to improving health and wellbeing at work”. And
strategies should be put in place, particularly for low paid sectors, to
make sure workers do not get stuck on low rates of pay.

There are some concrete proposals. Tribunal fees for hearings intended
to clarify employment status should be scrapped but - crucially - the
£1,200 fee would remain for broader issues such as discrimination or
failure to pay the minimum wage. As Jason Moyer-Lee, General Secretary
of the Independent Workers Union of Great Britain (IWGB) [has
observed](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jul/18/taylor-review-gig-economy-workers),
the Review proposes to “eliminate tribunal fees for employment status
hearings, but keep fees for workers who want to assert any of the rights
associated with their newly declared status.”

On the key question of how to classify people “employed” in the platform
economy the Review recommends that a new employment category be created,
that of “dependent contractor”, to cover workers under “control” or
“supervision” from their contracting company. Dependent contractors
would have the right to request a set number of hours when they have
been engaged with the same hirer for 12 months, an allocation
corresponding to the average number of hours they have been working.
These workers will also be entitled to a statement of employment status
and to receive statutory holiday and sick pay.

But the Review stops short of granting them a blanket right to the
minimum wage. Instead, the ‘platform companies’ that have designed the
‘gig economy’ within which they work need only be able to prove that
their contractors can expect an average wage that works out at least 1.2
times the minimum wage. If a worker logs on to the platform during a
quiet period when, for example, there are few taxi rides to offer or
deliveries to make, it is permissible for the platforms to continue to
pay an hourly rate below the minimum wage. During these hours they are
obliged only to give workers an estimate of how much they are likely to
earn during the session.

This recommendation undercuts the [landmark
verdict](%5Bhttps://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/uber-uk-tribunal-self-employed-status%5D)
delivered against Uber last October by a London employment tribunal
ruling that its drivers are not ‘self-employed’ and should therefore be
guaranteed the minimum wage and other basic employment rights applicable
to any other employee. It was a ruling that was always likely to signal
the start rather than the end of the battle to establish the rights due
to platform workers.

Viewed from one perspective these workers look much like any other
employee: Uber, for example, interviews its drivers, sets their default
routes, fixes their fare structure, provides (limited) training and runs
disciplinary procedures. Viewed from another, drivers can log on for
work when they choose and - in principle - are not obliged to take the
work available when they do log on. And, again in theory, workers can do
jobs for different platforms at the same time. It is possible to log on
to both the Uber and Deliveroo apps and to carry out work for both,
moving from one bit of piece work to the other. In these cases it isn’t
obvious which company is responsible for paying the minimum wage.

Taylor’s recommendation seeks to safeguard the ostensible freedom
platform workers have to take work as and when it suits their schedule.
If a platform was obliged to pay minimum wage rates during quiet periods
then in order to retain its profit margins it would be likely to oblige
workers to concentrate their work during busier periods, forcing them
into a standard shift-work pattern. The Review tries to address the
novel and complex issue of how to guarantee the minimum wage on
platforms designed to pay on a piece-work basis, weighing up the
interests of workers who value flexibility against those workers who
value security.

Labour’s response
-----------------

Responses to this element of the Review have been divided according to
the relative weight commentators accord each of these principles. Jonan
Boto, a former director of projects for Deliveroo, suggests that the
vaunted flexibility platforms offer could be given more substance [if
workers were offered a genuine
choice](https://www.ft.com/content/a52c64be-6580-11e7-9a66-93fb352ba1fe?mhq5j=e1)
regarding the nature of the work they sign-up for. “Rather than force
them to choose between a take-it-or-leave-it flexible contract and no
job,” Boto asks “why can companies not give people the option to choose
between full-time, part-time and fully flexible contracts?” The response
from unions has been less ambiguous. The IWGB and the TUC insist that
unless companies can show that their workers are genuinely self-employed
they must be treated as employees, regardless of whether they are
offered work through an agency, an online platform or an app.

Labour’s response shares the unions’ concern that the new legal category
recommended by Taylor will drive down conditions for an ever greater
proportion of workers as the gig economy model expands. [Discussing the
Review on the BBC’s Today
programme](https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jul/11/uber-is-not-morally-acceptable-says-shadow-business-secretary)
Shadow Business Secretary Rebecca Long-Bailey said she personally
boycotts Uber, a service she cannot regard as “morally acceptable”:

> We don’t really need a new status … the court victories that we’ve had
> so far have proved that many of these so-called self-employed people
> that work for the likes of Uber, for example, are workers and should
> be given adequate protections.

Labour’s current position, as outlined in the party’s [2017
manifesto](http://www.labour.org.uk/index.php/manifesto2017/), is to
offer a classic social democratic formula for defending and creating new
opportunities for workers, centred on better employment rights, stronger
unions, economic stimulus and investment in education and skills.

[The manifesto’s employment
programme](http://www.labour.org.uk/index.php/manifesto2017/fair-deal-at-work)
asserts the principle of equal rights for all workers ‘whether part-time
or full-time, temporary or permanent’. Zero hours contracts would be
banned outright, preserving the ideal that every worker should get a
guaranteed number of hours each week. Those who work regular hours for
more than 12 weeks would have a right to a regular contract, reflecting
those hours. Indeed employment rights would not only be defended, but
strengthened: tribunal fees would be abolished, the National Minimum
Wage would catch up with the Living Wage and paid paternity leave would
be extended to four weeks. Unions would be empowered through the rolling
out of sectoral collective bargaining and trade unions guaranteed access
to workplaces.

[The manifesto’s economic
strategy](http://www.labour.org.uk/index.php/manifesto2017/economy) is
built around a £250 billion National Transformation Fund channelled
through a new network of national and regional investment banks charged
investing in transport, communications and energy systems. With its
focus on big renewable energy projects and mass home insulation, and the
supply of ‘patient long-term finance’ the strategy draws on the [Green
New Deal](http://neweconomics.org/2008/07/green-new-deal/) and Mariana
Mazzucato’s concept of [The Entrepreneurial
State](https://marianamazzucato.com/entrepreneurial-state/).

And the proposed [National Education
Service](http://www.labour.org.uk/index.php/manifesto2017/towards-a-national-education-service)
seeks “to move towards cradle-to-grave learning that is free at the
point of use”, in the universalist spirit of of the NHS. The abolition
of tuition fees is just one part of a strategy that includes the
introduction of free, lifelong education in Further Education colleges,
the restoration of the Education Maintenance Allowance for 16 to
18-year-olds, the doubling of completed apprenticeships, investment in
child-care and Sure Start centres.

These manifesto pledges represent an unapologetic return to the cardinal
social democratic principle that an active state must act to shape
economic frameworks capable of offering people decent work and a fair
share of the wealth generated by economic and technological progress.
But it makes little mention of the specific issues surrounding the
changing nature of employment explored by the Taylor Review. The
manifesto does note “real concerns that rapid changes to the world of
work are rendering existing employment categories outdated’ and promises
‘a dedicated commission to modernise the law around employment status”.

Basic income: a platform for platform workers?
----------------------------------------------

Those brief references scarcely hint at the intensity of the debate
raging across the left about the future of work. Contrary to much prior
speculation, the manifesto made no mention of the big idea currently at
the heart of that debate: the credibility and desirability of the
introduction of a universal basic income (UBI).

It’s an idea with huge intuitive appeal, promising a guaranteed income
floor providing a secure base for participation in a turbulent labour
market increasingly shaped by the new forms of work created by the
platforms. Workers would have much greater freedom to choose what work
they do and for whom, and more space to go back to college, retrain or
set up their own enterprises. By removing conditionality a UBI also
promises to streamline a complex and often cruel welfare system, and
would start to compensate for unpaid social labour.

In the past few years the concept has moved from the realm of
speculation to that of serious advocacy. Proposals working out the
details for the technical implementation of a UBI have been published by
several mainstream think-tanks, including Matthew Taylor’s RSA. And the
idea has helped generate a new strain of left futurist thought including
Alex Williams and Nick Srnicek’s *Inventing the Future*, Rutger
Bregman’s *Utopia for Realists* and Paul Mason’s *Postcapitalism*. With
Guy Standing’s *Basic Income: And How We Can Make It Happen* the UBI has
even made it into the Pelican Introductions range.

It is certainly possible that a commitment to some form of basic income
might appear in a future Labour manifesto. Corbyn and McDonnell have
made positive comments about the concept and in February Shadow Treasury
Secretary Jonathan Reynolds was appointed to head a working group (whose
members include Guy Standing) charged with assessing how a UBI might fit
into the party’s long term economic strategy.

The party’s ambivalence reflects the difficulties as well as the
opportunities inherent in the concept of a basic income. Most obviously
there would be the immense political challenge of convincing a sceptical
public that a UBI could be funded. Though Labour’s strong election
performance and public reaction to the Grenfell disaster indicate
increasing unrest with the Government’s austerity programme, the
conservative image of money as a limited commodity that must be managed
in the manner of a household budget continues to resonate, being much
easier to visualise than the complex reality that money is an abstract
entity that [credit-issuing banks produce through a few keystrokes on a
computer](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F4eGTY6RWeg). [Estimates
suggest](http://www.bath.ac.uk/publications/the-fiscal-and-distributional-implications-of-alternative-universal-basic-income-schemes-in-the-uk/)
that a UBI set at a level of around £72 a week may cost up to £288
billion, a funding commitment that, though it could be achieved through
similar mechanisms to the Government’s ongoing Quantitative Easing
scheme, would have to be forced through against ferocious political
headwinds. If finance for a programme on this scale could be secured
there would be significant opportunity cost in using it to secure a UBI
rather than the many other aspirations Labour harbours, such as
comprehensive public sector reform, economic stimulus, green energy or
universal child-care.

And even after introducing a basic income a Labour government would
still want to protect public services and welfare provision for those
with special requirements, such as households with children, people with
disabilities or those struggling to with housing costs. A Conservative
administration inheriting a UBI might well retain it - such a
fundamental reform would be just as difficult to overturn as to
introduce - but may well take its existence as licence to press ahead
with the unrestrained marketisation of public services. It is surely
significant that the principle of a UBI has been embraced by economic
libertarians such as the [Adam Smith
Institute](https://www.adamsmith.org/blog/a-neoliberal-case-for-a-basic-income-or-something-like-it)
and of course much of the [Californian tech
establishment](http://uk.businessinsider.com/entrepreneurs-endorsing-universal-basic-income-2017-3/#sam-altman-3).

Perhaps the strongest objection to a UBI from a left perspective is
philosophical rather than practical: resort to a UBI as a form of social
protection can look very much like capitulation to capital, driven by
fatalism about the labour movement’s capacity to take on the powerful
forces seeking to monopolise the gains from new technology. For [Alyssa
Battistoni](https://www.dissentmagazine.org/article/false-promise-universal-basic-income-andy-stern-ruger-bregman)
Silicon Valley’s favourable disposition towards UBI indicates it is seen
as a price worth paying to clear the space for elites to direct new
technologies as they wish, without reference to the wider population:

> \[Y\]ou don’t need to be Robespierre to be suspicious of a proposal
> that explicitly announces its intent to protect the rich from
> working-class rage - particularly when one of the major questions of
> UBI is where the free money will come from.

It can certainly be argued that a UBI meets André Gorz’s definition of a
[‘non-reformist
reform’](%5Bhttps://www.jacobinmag.com/2013/05/curious-utopias/%5D), a
measure designed to repair a system that in time reveals itself as a
Trojan Horse able to break it apart. If a UBI leads to the automation of
undesirable work that people are now empowered to refuse, and the wage
for desirable work falls to zero because more people now have the luxury
to do it without pay, the prospect of a post-capitalist society looms
into view. As Battistoni puts it, understood in this sense a UBI may be
“the fully automated monorail to luxury communism, where we all own the
robots and everyone gets what they need.” This scenario is premised on a
maximal version of the UBI, a universal, unconditional payment able to
furnish a decent standard of life beyond work.

Whatever the merits of that speculation, it is clear that proposals for
a UBI offer no silver bullet for dealing with the forces reshaping
today’s labour market. A basic income may facilitate a transition to a
post-capitalist society in which the laws of the marketplace have broken
down. Or it may lead to a dystopia in which an elite appropriates the
gains from new technology to itself, keeping the masses at bay by
releasing some of their largesse in the form of a subsistence payment.

One frequently discussed alternative to the UBI suggests reviving the
classic New Deal idea of a job guarantee. By acting as an [“employer of
last
resort”](https://www.socialeurope.eu/no-need-basic-income-five-policies-deal-threat-technological-unemployment)
the state gives commercially unemployed workers opportunities to
continue to make use of their existing skills while retraining or
up-skilling (a scheme that might be of particular benefit to older
workers with less opportunity to retrain). These workers could boost
health and care sectors coming under increasing pressure as the
population ages, and participate in a mass programme to modernise
infrastructure to meet the challenge of climate change. Another
possibility would be to [mandate companies enjoying windfall gains from
new technology to pay into sovereign wealth
funds](https://medium.com/@MattBruenig/nickel-and-dime-socialism-47fcec406295)
that would work like Norway’s oil investment fund, facilitating a
national savings fund that could be dedicated to the collective good.

Rewiring economic ownership
---------------------------

But as [*New Socialist*](https://newsocialist.org.uk/tag/economics/) has
noted Labour has been moving in a still more radical direction, focusing
on the fundamental issue of the structures of economic ownership that
establish the frameworks ordering our economic lives. Soon after Corbyn
won the leadership the first time round John McDonnell signalled
interest in exploring those structures with his [New Economics
series](http://www.labour.org.uk/blog/entry/the-new-economics), which
invited leading economists to pitch radical ideas for economic
transformation.

Corbyn and McDonnell both came of political age during the 1970s when
Tony Benn [tried and failed to implement a radical agenda for extending
economic
democracy](http://www.newleftproject.org/index.php/site/article_comments/labours_alternative_economic_strategy_40_years_on),
and McDonnell played a major role in the explorations of democratic
planning undertaken by the Greater London Council in the 1980s. [During
a
speech](http://labourlist.org/2016/04/the-tories-are-just-as-vicious-as-they-have-always-been-john-mcdonnell-speech/)
early last year marking Preston City Council’s work to develop a
co-operative ecosystem capable of keeping wealth circulating in local
communities, McDonnell argued that Labour’s historic focus on
redistribution could only be effective during periods of strong economic
growth:

> \[I\]f growth is low, incomes will rise more slowly. It is much harder
> for the government to redistribute incomes when they are not rising so
> rapidly. That means the priority for progressives must be not so much
> the distribution of income, as the distribution of ownership … Labour
> must be a party that is concerned about ownership of wealth and
> assets, not only the distribution of income.

McDonnell’s interest in that 'old tradition in the labour movement of
decentralised ownership and democratised wealth' surfaced in manifesto
commitments to double the size of Britain’s relatively small
co-operative sector by introducing a version of Italy’s [Marcora
Law](https://www.thenews.coop/98000/sector/retail/marcora-law-effective-tool-active-employment-policy/),
a ‘right to own’ making employees the buyer of first refusal when the
company they work for is up for sale, and requiring regional investment
banks to prioritise funding for co-operatives.

This direction of travel was confirmed by the *[Alternative Models of
Ownership](http://www.labour.org.uk/page/-/PDFs/9472_Alternative%20Models%20of%20Ownership%20all_v4.pdf)*
paper written by a group of radical economists and councillors
commissioned by McDonnell and Rebecca Lane-Bailey at the turn of the
year and published in June. As - again - [noted by *New
Socialist*](https://newsocialist.org.uk/labours-alternative-models-of-ownership-report/),
the report assesses the shortcomings of Britain’s shareholder-driven
capitalist model with remarkable frankness for a document delivered to a
major political party, arguing that firms driven by a focus on quarterly
profits tend to neglect investment in favour of short-term gain, pushing
down productivity and wages. Decision making oriented to the long-term
requires co-operative structures in which a much wider range of
stakeholders can participate. One of the report's most bracing passages
asserts:

> There is a commonplace implicit assumption in UK society that there is
> a natural separation between the political and economic realms, with
> democratic structures and processes only applying to the former. The
> economic realm, unlike the political realm, is deemed too complex and
> sensitive to be treated in the same way, and in consequence of the
> lack of democratic process, economic decisions are often made by, and
> on behalf of, a narrow elite, with scant consideration of the
> well-being of the general population.

The paper explores possibilities for opening up decision making
processes at all levels of economic activity, from individual companies,
through to local economies and state owned enterprises. Co-operative
enterprises offer more stable and fairer environments for workers,
offering them say over decisions and a stake in ownership. Municipal
economies built around strong ‘anchor’ institutions such as local
authorities, hospitals and universities, are more effective in keeping
wealth and power within local communities. And public enterprises,
subject to democratic oversight, can play a vital role in pursuing
national strategic objectives such as the development of post-carbon
energy infrastructures, the modernisation of transport networks and
universal access to advanced communications. The paper’s focus on
ownership rather than redistribution seeks to move Labour’s economic
strategy in an explicitly socialist direction:

> \[Labour’s objective should\] be nothing other than the creation of an
> economy which is fairer, more democratic, and more sustainable; that
> would overturn the hierarchies of power in our economy, placing those
> who create the real wealth in charge; that would end decades of
> under-investment and wasted potential by tearing down the vested
> interests that hold this country back … The historic name for that
> society is socialism, and this is Labour’s goal.

Platform co-operativism
-----------------------

The Alternative Models report provides a robust philosophical foundation
for moving Labour’s current programme in more radical directions. John
Marlow, for example, writing in *New Socialist*, suggests how the
manifesto pledge for a National Investment Bank could ‘support a real
process of transformation and democratisation in our economy’ by funding
a significant shift towards co-operative forms of ownership.

The report also indicates how co-operative models might play a crucial
role in directing the new technologies driving the automation of the
economy to work for the collective good:

> The goal should be to embrace the technological potential of
> modernity, accelerating into a more automated, productive future with
> all its liberating possibilities, while building new institutions
> around ownership, work, leisure and investment, where technological
> change is shaped by the common good.

Today, the direction of that technological change is far from
democratic, shaped by a tiny group of extraordinarily powerful firms
which, following the sci-fi writer Bruce Sterling, Adam Greenfield in
*[Radical
Technologies](https://www.versobooks.com/books/2453-radical-technologies)*
refers to as “the Stacks”, in reference to “the strategy of vertical
integration by which each of them seeks to control the network, as well
as the platforms, applications, physical devices and content that run on
and are connected by it”, seeking to “mediate and monetise everyday life
to the maximum possible extent” [^chapter-4-1].

The Stacks have effectively pioneered a new form of capitalism,
developing platforms that provide a space in which entire markets
operate. The platforms act as intermediaries, taking a cut from the
transactions that operate within the spaces they police. Frank Pasquale
puts it [neatly in his review of Nick
Srnicek’s](https://bostonreview.net/class-inequality/frank-pasquale-will-amazon-take-over-world)
*Platform Capitalism*, a useful study of the phenomenon from a left
perspective:

> The platform acts as the government of a certain market, and its fees
> might be viewed as de facto taxes on the participants to whom
> it provides order, marketing, and other services. Like states aiming
> for a monopoly on the legitimate use of force, platforms aspire to a
> commercial monopoly in the ‘space’ they deem their own. Thanks to
> economies of scope and scale, a supplier of goods and services is much
> less likely to be undercut by other suppliers once it reaches a
> certain critical mass.

Srnicek’s book suggests a taxonomy illuminating the progress the
platform corporations are making towards colonising broad swathes of the
world’s economy: Google and Facebook have built platforms claiming an
ever greater proportion of the world’s advertising revenues; platforms
constructed by General Electric and Siemens offer cutting-edge
technologies to manufacturing firms; Spotify runs a product platform
that turns traditional goods into subscription-based services; the lean
platforms offered by Uber and Airbnb use apps to link buyers and
sellers; and Amazon, which is becoming perhaps the most powerful of all
them, is colonising both the retail and cloud services markets. For
Greenfield:

> This is the apotheosis of what it means to be integrated as a Stack:
> Amazon owns the data centres, it owns the distribution and order
> fulfilment infrastructure, it owns the point of presence in your
> living room, it owns the data generated in the course of every user
> interaction and every physical delivery, and of course it takes a cut
> of any revenue generated by the consumption of content. [^chapter-4-2]

The common objective for all platform capitalists is the rapid enclosure
of a particular market, a crash-and-burn philosophy unashamedly
expressed in PayPal co-founder Peter Thiel’s 2014 Wall Street Journal
op-ed [“Competition is for
Losers”](https://www.wsj.com/articles/peter-thiel-competition-is-for-losers-1410535536).

Recognising that there is no turning the clock back on platform
technology, a nascent platform co-operativism movement has formed to
seek to extend the alternative value system represented by the
co-operative model to the platform economy. Platform co-operatives
promise to circulate returns to the workers and users who run and own
the platforms rather than to billionaire venture capitalists. They also
offer the prospect of democratic control over the data generated by the
platform’s activity, which under the Silicon Valley model is
appropriated and mined for further business advantage.

Douglas Rushkoff, in *[Ours to Hack and to
Own](http://www.orbooks.com/catalog/ours-to-hack-and-to-own/)*, a
platform co-operativism manifesto published earlier this year by the
movement’s founders Trebor Scholz and Nathan Schneider, writes:

> Platform cooperatives - as a direct affront to the platform monopolies
> characterising digital industrialism - offer a means of both
> reclaiming the value we create and forging the solidarity we need to
> work toward our collective good. Instead of extracting value and
> delivering it up to distant shareholders, we harvest, circulate, and
> recycle the value again and again. And those are precisely the habits
> we must retrieve as we move ahead from an extractive and growth-based
> economy to one as regenerative and sustainable as we're going to need
> to survive the great challenges of our time. [^chapter-4-3]

One of the best known platform co-ops profiled in the book, [Stocksy
United](https://www.stocksy.com/), is an image-bank service owned and
governed by its employees and contributing photographers, set up by a
former iStock executive who found the company’s business imperatives in
conflict with the interests of the independent artists it claimed to
represent. Others include the [Green Taxi
Cooperative](http://greentaxico-op.com/), a Denver-based taxi platform
owned by some 800 taxi and app-based drivers who have each put up a
\$2,000 investment to become co-owners of what has become the largest
taxi company in the state of Colorado.
[Fairmondo](https://fairmondo.uk/) is an Amazon-style marketplace
selling fair trade products. [Resonate](https://resonate.is/) is a
music-streaming platform owned by musicians, labels, and fans. And the
[indycube community](https://www.indycube.community/) manages co-working
spaces, shared offices and collaborative workspaces for a collective of
freelancers.

As Srnicek notes, the movement faces the fundamental issue that the
platform economy is premised on the establishment of monopoly power:
once a platform reaches a critical mass it establishes a forbidding
competitive advantage. A co-operative like Fairmondo, for example,
offering some two million products, faces the formidable challenge of
competing with Amazon, which sells more than 480 million to a massive
customer base (in the United States alone there are some 80 million
Amazon Prime accounts). Srnicek suggests that confronting the platforms
will require all of the antitrust powers available to governments and
international bodies, and perhaps the straightforward creation of
publicly owned platforms:

> Antitrust cases can break up monopolies, local regulations can impede
> or even ban exploitative lean platforms, government agencies can
> impose new privacy controls, and coordinated action on tax avoidance
> can draw capital back into public hands … Rather than just regulating
> corporate platforms, efforts could be made to create public platforms
> -platforms owned and controlled by the people. (And, importantly,
> independent of the surveillance state apparatus.) … Perhaps today we
> must collectivise the platforms. [^chapter-4-4]

For Scholz and Schneider co-operative platforms must be nurtured within
frameworks as effective as the Silicon Valley “assembly line” that
generated the likes of Google, Facebook and Uber. The Valley has
developed a sleek system that puts start-ups in touch with sources of
virtual capital, engineering talent and marketing and lobbying
expertise. The elements for a similarly effective ecosystem for
co-operative and public platforms already exist, or could be created:
state investment banks, credit unions, social venture funds, strong
links with universities, and the participation of the open source
software movement. In an interview with
[openDemocracy](https://www.opendemocracy.net/open2017/oliver-sylvester-bradley/build-democracy-and-it-spreads-like-virus-qa-on-platform-co-ops-with-nathan)
Schneider said:

> Policymakers who recognise the power of co-operative enterprise for
> bringing sustainable wealth to their communities have done several
> things to support it. They ensure that there are good, flexible
> co-operative incorporation laws. They provide development funds and
> financing. They provide incentives for companies to operate
> co-operatively and contract with co-ops that are commensurate with
> co-ops' commitment to the common good.

Alternative digital models
--------------------------

Labour has already taken some tentative steps towards embracing the
platform co-op concept. Corbyn released a [Digital Democracy
manifesto](https://d3n8a8pro7vhmx.cloudfront.net/corbynstays/pages/329/attachments/original/1472552058/Digital_Democracy.pdf?1472552058)
during his second leadership campaign last summer which promised to
“foster the cooperative ownership of digital platforms for distributing
labour and selling services”, with investment banks financing “social
enterprises whose websites and apps are designed to minimise the costs
of connecting producers with consumers in the transport, accommodation,
cultural, catering and other important sectors of the British economy.”
And [McDonnell spoke at a platform co-operativism
conference](http://www.john-mcdonnell.net/john_mcdonnell_mp_speaking_at_the_open_2017_platform_cooperatives_conference_at_goldsmiths_university_in_london_today_said)
earlier this year, where he expressed an aspiration to foster “a new
generation of co-operatively owned Ubers and Airbnbs”. The Alternative
Models of Ownership report offers an ideal foundation on which to
construct a more robust strategy for democratising platform technology.

Limited as it is, the most valuable sections of the Taylor Review probe
the complex issues of flexibility and security to which new technologies
give rise. It is right to recognise the tantalising glimpse of freedom
that platform work opens to those who want it. It is for the left to
develop strategies for ensuring these technologies work for the
collective good, providing both flexibility and security. New
technologies and the new forms of work they open offers opportunities
for liberation, not enslavement. It is essential that socialists
understand them, and participate in the processes already underway to
work out how they can be employed for the benefit of ‘the many, not the
few’.

[^chapter-4-1]: Adam Greenfield, *Radical Technologies*, Verso, p. 275.

[^chapter-4-2]: Adam Greenfield, *Radical Technologies*, Verso, p. 279.

[^chapter-4-3]: Trebor Scholz and Nathan Schneider (Ed.), *Ours to Hack
    and to Own*, Or Books.

[^chapter-4-4]: Nick Srnicek, *Platform Capitalism, Polity*, p. 127.
