Capitalist and Socialist Universal Basic Incomes
================================================

**[John Marlow](https://twitter.com/JohnTMarlow)**

There have been significant debates around the Labour Party’s increasing
sympathy for universal basic income (UBI). Though UBI’s alternatives
have also been discussed by both Jeremy Corbyn and John McDonnell, UBI
itself has been the starting point for policy responses to increased
precariousness of employment and the possible effects of greater
automation, with McDonnell setting up [a working
group](http://basicincome.org/news/2017/02/uk-labour-party-ubi-working-group/)
to look into the idea in February last year.

The concept of UBI has been a mainstay for left and green parties in
recent decades, and has rapidly become mainstream as it gains increasing
support from both centrist parties and individual capitalists, becoming
at least an inspiration for further policy development across the
political spectrum. However, as this concept has become more popular
even among mainstream commentators who seem increasingly ready to
entertain at least one form of radical change, it has remained
controversial among Marxists.

Authors in the “post work” tradition such as Nick Srnicek and Alex
Williams see a UBI as a central feature of a highly automated
post-capitalist society. Within capitalism, it is put forward as a
transformational reform, smoothing the path towards post-capitalist
society by challenging the ideology of work that makes one’s job a
signifier of social purpose and worth.

In contrast, the “workerist” tradition has argued that it would
undermine the key aim of post-capitalism. A [recent critique in Jacobin
magazine](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2017/12/universal-basic-income-inequality-work)
is exemplary. UBI proponents are charged with abandoning the idea of
worker’s emancipation in the workplace through control of the production
process. UBI, it is said, offers workers only a subordinated and
alienating position within a market economy.

So should a UBI be part of a socialist vision for the future? Does a UBI
even make sense as a transformative reform within capitalism? Debates on
UBI as a practical policy are well-rehearsed, but this article seeks to
answer these questions through a critical review of the Marxist
perspectives on the concept.

Freedom in work
---------------

“Workerism” is the often derogatory term for Marxist analysis that
dogmatically privileges manual production workers as creators of
economic value and agents of history, calling for workplace organisation
to the exclusion of all else. Though this is a fair criticism of
specific Marxist movements, much of the Marxist tradition is
“workerist”—with a small “w”—in emphasizing wage labour as the origin of
economic value. As workers, we are said to create value and continually
remake the world, yet at someone else’s direction. Seeing ourselves as
passive “employees” rather than active creators is crucial to the
concept of alienation, which underpins capitalists’ ability to
expropriate value from production, yet herein is said to lie our latent
revolutionary potential.

Accordingly, emancipation cannot be seen as freedom from work, which
would appear to be an abdication of agency. Instead, class struggle
centres on the workplace, on the fate of the value we create, and on the
control of the work process itself. The goal is freedom-in-work through
the socialisation and democratisation of the workplace. The free
association of producers replaces wage labour.

This position can be caricatured—and historically often has been—as
ignoring those who are outside the realm of capitalist production.
However, it maintains that unpaid work (such as domestic labour) can,
like all labour, create use value, which is something to celebrate.
Greater recognition of this fact gave rise to ideas such as “wages for
housework”. Although proposed in opposition to narrow workerism, these
ideas still embody a certain workerist logic: the response to unpaid
labour is to demand that it should be recognised as labour proper by
linking it to a wage, and that it ultimately should be socialised, in
order to emancipate it. In this vision, the realm of work expands
outwards, but work is to become self-directed, and no longer alienating.

In this context, it is not hard to understand the workerist opposition
to UBI. To the extent that UBI means we can drop out of work, we gain
“free time”, but we lose the historical agency we have as workers. As
UBI-funded consumers, we are seen as passive, alienated, taking as given
a world shaped by others. We may do work, such as housework, that
creates use value outside of the market, but there is no reason to
believe that this work must be “free”: it may fall victim to other
structures of domination such as patriarchy. Might not UBI create an
enormous pressure to “volunteer” in some approved manner, to
symbolically earn one’s UBI cheque?

From the beginning, Marxism has pointed out that wage labour offers an
escape from “pre-capitalist” structures, even as it imposes a new form
of subjugation. Workerism embodies the classical Marxist teleology that
sees capitalism as a step on a liberatory path that is only completed
through the socialisation of labour. From this perspective, UBI seems to
miss a crucial step in the process towards post-capitalism.

This critique recognises the fact that UBI is usually proposed as a
specifically social democratic reform within capitalism. Despite all the
talk of “free time”, such a formulation of UBI can only be intended to
leave the system of wage labour intact, and this is how left critiques
of UBI tend to understand it. As such, the liberation involved appears
limited: if we still have to perform wage labour to supplement our UBI
cheques, then we still cannot escape the alienation of working as
someone else’s tool.

UBI is also unlikely to be seen as a transformative reform from a
workerist perspective. Organising for a (higher) UBI, to lessen the
impact of low pay and precarious conditions, appears as an alternative
to workplace organisation. And, from this perspective, organising to
plead for state protection from capital looks like a dead end. Indeed,
to the extent that UBI is really a subsidy of low pay and precarious
conditions, it is not clear who the state would be protecting from whom.

Freedom from work
-----------------

The post-work tradition has its roots in the post-operaismo of Italian
Marxists such as Carlo Vercellone, Antonio Negri, and other “post-work”
thinkers such as André Gorz. Its key contention is that work and
value-production increasingly fail to conform to the model we see in
Marx, one that is better suited to early industrial times. As production
becomes more and more immaterial, less bounded by the conventional
workplace, and less defined by physical time or output, labour’s role in
production becomes harder to measure and define. In other words, the
sphere of value creation becomes diffuse. It comes to include not just
domestic and reproductive labour, but all activity that is generative of
a functioning society and the knowledge that it possesses.

As a result, much less emphasis is placed on the idea of emancipation
*within* work. Instead, the receipt of a basic income often takes centre
stage as the emancipatory moment, releasing us from the compulsion of
performing alienated activity for the market, or indeed for the state.
Work is not transformed so much as progressively abandoned in favour of
UBI-funded, self-directed, productive activity.

Technological advance plays a critical role in this approach. The growth
of labour productivity through automation is seen, in the tradition of
Gorz, as outpacing our demand for the products of labour. This would
appear to make productive full-time work for everyone an impossibility,
both as a source of income and as a route to emancipation. A related
critique is David Graeber’s view that “[bullshit
jobs](https://strikemag.org/bullshit-jobs/)” have become the norm in
capitalism—jobs which may have some tactical rational for employers yet
cannot be seen as meaningfully creating value for society. For Graeber,
such jobs should not be socialised; they should be abolished.

So workerist and post-work traditions actually share a vision of
production through free association in a society that has moved beyond
wage labour, but they foresee very different paths to get there: the one
through the transformation of work, the other through escaping it.

The moral agenda is also different. Paying workers “the full fruits of
their labour” is a caricature of the workerist position, but not
entirely without basis. By contrast, proponents of UBI see it as a way
for society to reward all useful activity performed beyond the market.
It is often promoted as a “dividend” of past efforts to develop
knowledge, technology and “social capital”.

Lastly, there is the question of the transformative potential of a UBI
on capitalism itself. Inasmuch as it creates an alternative to wage
labour, a UBI is often seen by left proponents as a tool to undermine
the bargaining power of capital over labour, forcing improvements in pay
and working conditions, or even challenging capitalism itself. Even the
implementation of a modest “partial” UBI is seen as a transformative
reform, undermining the ideology of work that makes one’s job a
signifier of social purpose and worth, and that stands politically in
the way of the transition to a post-work society.

Some sources of confusion
-------------------------

One conclusion we can draw from this controversy is that it is not
always helpful to read the labour theory of value (LTV) as a normative
theory, despite the undoubted rhetorical power of doing so. With LTV
treated as a moral theory of theft, the UBI debate becomes one of
competing moral claims to the social product, based upon competing
claims about value-creation.

But in what sense should value-creation in capitalism be a moral
yardstick when we are talking about transformation to post-capitalist
society? Marx famously proposed “to each according to his (sic.) needs”
as a better principle; a post-capitalist society has to transcend the
logic of reward-for-contribution to realise that vision. LTV, on the
other hand, can be seen as a descriptive theory of the determination of
prices of production under specific circumstances. This is why Marx only
considers wage labour in that theory—unpaid work is not considered to
have any effect on prices.

There is also a lot of confusion about sequencing in this debate. Are we
talking about before or after the revolution? To attack UBI, it is
tempting to counterpose the promise of after-the-revolution socialism to
the dystopia of a capitalism shored-up by a lumpenproletariat-pacifying
UBI. At the same time, it is tempting for the post-work side to
counterpose the self-directed, unpaid activity and free association of
hypothetical UBI-receivers to the horrors of actually-existing wage
labour.

But neither of these are entirely fair comparisons to make. Both compare
capitalist realities with states of affairs that are really only
possible post-capitalism. We need to consider what role UBI might play
in a post-capitalist/socialist/communist economy. In parallel, we need
to consider exactly what kind of UBI is possible in a capitalist
economy, and the limits thereof.

UBI would be contingently necessary in a post-capitalist economy
----------------------------------------------------------------

UBI has emerged as a policy response to the problem of persistent labour
oversupply and the precarity and poverty that goes with it. This
oversupply, however, is a necessary feature of capitalism. In the
workerist vision of a socialist economy, the problem is solved by
guaranteed access to employment. In the post-work vision, UBI solves the
problem that employment can no longer be guaranteed. My aim in this
section is to suggest how this chasm might be bridged.

First of all, I believe that full employment—understood in a certain
way—should be seen as a basic requirement in a post-capitalist economy.
The opportunity to work as much as we would like is not just a
nice-to-have; it is needed to underpin the strength of labour and ensure
the democratic character of the production process. I am tempted to say
that worker power through effective labour scarcity is even more
fundamental than the *de jure* control of the productive apparatus.
There is no state enterprise or worker coop that could not potentially
become the site of alienation if you had to beg to be allowed to join,
i.e. if surplus labour put some people in a position of *de facto* power
over others.

But there is no reason why we should all want to work forty hours a
week. In fact, “how much we want to work”, on aggregate, is not a matter
of immutable individual preferences but something to be consciously and
collectively decided. It should be an object of collective economic
management, and this is where UBI may play a role post capitalism.

How much we should want to work, moreover, depends on how much we want
to produce. In capitalism, growth is just the accidental product of
uncoordinated profit maximization. Associated production, by contrast,
implies a collective decision about how big the economy should be at any
one time. Even putting aside the issue of ecological limits, the balance
between well-being now and in the future, and thus between current
consumption and investment, is fundamentally an ethical and political
one. To let the current and future scale of output be determined
accidentally, through uncoordinated activity, is to abdicate
responsibility. A socialist society has to target a certain scale of
output at any date, thus aiming for a certain trajectory of growth or
de-growth.

A target level of output then implies a target for the input of labour
time, given the state of production technology at any one moment.
Looking forward, this is unlikely to mean everyone working all week; not
in the context of automation, ecological constraints and the satiation
of basic needs. So there can be no question of simply trying to
stimulate whatever output it takes, Keynesian style, to absorb however
much labour we might happen to want to supply. Instead, full employment
would require that we adjust the amount of labour we *want* to supply to
the desired level of output.

Now this is not a problem where there is no market. For example, if I
agree, in a self-sufficient commune, to a plan which foresees everyone
working 20 hours a week, then by definition I decide and want to work
the required 20 hours a week. The supply and demand sides are brought
together in a conscious decision. The same applies to voluntary activity
and any work done for its own sake, rather than for payment.

However, there are few visions of a post-capitalist economy that do not
foresee at least a consumer market and payment for labour (in money,
“labour tokens”, etc.), at least transitionally. And where work is
performed for payment, the problem arises of setting this reward at the
right level to incentivize the required supply of labour. Rationing out
scarce paid work is possible but suboptimal, leaving nearly everyone
dissatisfied.

This is where UBI comes in. Clearly, by raising or lowering a UBI, we
could collectively influence aggregate labour supply, whilst leaving
each of us free to decide how much we each want to work for payment. In
fact, we should speak here not just of UBI but of the general balance
between labour and non-labour income. The latter includes goods and
services provided in kind, like public healthcare, and money transfers
such as pensions, as well as UBI. Here then, UBI becomes an intelligent
tool for planning aggregate labour supply in the context of prior
defined goals for aggregate production and consumption.

Consequently, instead of seeing “workerist” and “post-work” visions of
post-capitalist society as opposing each other, we can see them as
contingently necessary solutions to different historical circumstances.
We can see UBI as a contingently necessary tool, rather than as
something mandated by a particular view of the LTV. In a
low-productivity, early industrial context, with a strong desire to
increase output to meet basic needs, we face the problem of how to
motivate and compensate the performance of a large quantity of arduous
work. In this context, there is limited scope, macroeconomically, for
extensive non-labour income.

By contrast, with high labour productivity, high living standards and
ecological constraints, we face the problem of how to allocate output
without giving rise to unquenchable demands for paid employment. As a
result, a shift towards non-labour income becomes macroeconomically
necessary. Meeting particular needs comes first, in my view, but
something like a UBI becomes increasingly desirable, and even hard to
avoid. So the post-work vision of UBI in a highly automated communist
economy, in which little work needs to be paid for, also makes sense.
Vitally, both visions are ones of full employment, in the sense that we
each get as much paid work as we want.

But are we really still talking about UBI at this point? The same
mechanisms can be discussed with reference to basic service provision or
systems of rationing to meet basic needs; making UBI the theme just
situates the discussion within debates on automation and the potential
outcomes of capitalism’s changing technological base. It is also clear
that a post-capitalist “UBI” is functionally completely different from a
capitalist one. So does a UBI make sense in a capitalist economy, highly
automated or otherwise?

The limits of UBI within capitalism
-----------------------------------

The question for proponents of UBI as a progressive measure within
capitalism is whether it can really be high enough to provide a
widespread alternative to wage labour. It seems the answer is “no”.

There are circumstances in which a modest UBI could increase labour
market participation, but these are limited. More generally, a rising
UBI in a capitalist economy will decrease labour participation and
unemployment, with predictable effects. Sooner or later the labour
market will grow “tight” and the bargaining power of labour stronger.
Inflation is likely to rise as firms try to pass on higher labour costs.
Ultimately, without state intervention, the result must be a capital
strike: investment will collapse as profit rates fall, regenerating
unemployment and returning labour to its former weakness.

This is the point where the state usually intervenes, in the guise of
fighting inflation. If the state had just raised the level of UBI, then
the obvious inflation-fighting response would be to lower the UBI again,
forcing people back onto the jobs market and undercutting wage demands.
The possibility of a UBI in a capitalist economy is conditional on it
being low enough *not* to provide a viable alternative to wage labour
for most people.

For the same reason, UBI *within* capitalism is quite likely to mean the
redistribution of income from higher- to lower-paid workers, rather than
taking capital income and redistributing it to labour. There may be
interesting possibilities to tap rental income flows like land rents and
speculative capital gains, but the overall scope for sustainably
reducing profit rates to pay for a UBI must be limited.

Moreover, a modest UBI that failed to provide a viable alternative to
paid employment might actually increase profit rates. This might be the
case if a UBI was effectively funded at the expense of higher-paid
labour, whilst also facilitating lower pay and more precarious
conditions for many workers. In this case, capital would be better off,
whereas workers as a whole would be worse off. A UBI could become part
of a package to create a “business friendly environment”: business might
still be forced to pay some workers well, but some of that excessive pay
could be recovered through taxation to subsidize low pay and
“flexibility” for others.

What difference does automation make?
-------------------------------------

In a sense, automation could change all this, but in another sense—and
this is where the LTV is crucial—it would make no difference at all. The
idea behind the appeal to automation is that labour productivity will
become so high that output can simultaneously fund a generous UBI, high
wages and plentiful profit. Hence, no one would be compelled to work,
enough people would still be willing to sell their time to capitalist
firms, and entrepreneurs will still want to invest, all at the same
time. The capitalist system of exploitation remains intact, but we all
get to live a good life anyway.

There is an extensive debate about how likely this actually is, given
recent trends of slowing productivity growth. We must also consider the
capacity of capital to find non-utility enhancing ways to absorb surplus
and create work through zero-sum competitive games, such as in
marketing, or just through the expansion of corporate bureaucracies.
However, even assuming the promise of automation is fulfilled, this
vision raises certain questions.

Firstly, it is not correct, that UBI will be necessary to create demand
for the output of automated production. Competitive consumption by the
capitalist class and by states could perform this function perfectly
well. We also need to be wary of what are essentially moral appeals to
capital, in the form of arguments that say automation will make a UBI
necessary in order to preserve some idea of the good (but capitalist)
society. This is utopian, unless it can be specified why capital should
acquiesce.

More fundamentally, we may ask why this future is not with us already,
given that labour productivity has quadrupled in the post war period.
The answer is that labour, at least for the first three decades, was
powerful enough to maintain its share of output, resulting in rising
living standards for workers. After that, increases in productivity were
rerouted into supporting the endless accumulation of capital.

The high-tech vision of UBI, the darling of Silicon Valley billionaires,
would represent the historic defeat of labour. Working to achieve this
vision would mean ensuring that workers’ standards of living do not rise
with productivity, in order to make UBI affordable. Indeed, we could
also make such a “full” UBI affordable now, hypothetically, just by
drastically reducing our standard of living. It would be kind of the
same thing.

Can a modest UBI be a transformative reform?
--------------------------------------------

I hope that the preceding sections have shown that UBI under capitalism
and UBI in a post-capitalist society can’t be understood as the same
thing. Many appealing visions of life with a UBI belong strictly in a
post-capitalist world, because they are not compatible with capitalism’s
functional requirement for surplus labour and accumulation.

Post-work critiques of the narrowness of workerist understandings of
value creation do not have merit, but escape from alienating work is not
a plausible option for most under capitalism—the broadly workerist
vision of emancipation in and through work therefore remains vital.
Moreover, the idea that a UBI could dramatically alter the bargaining
position of workers within capitalism, or could even cause the tables to
be turned, is logical but not realistic. If we had the power to kill off
capitalism with a UBI, then we would not need a UBI to do so. And until
that point, any UBI will be strictly limited by the imperative of
profitability.

This leaves us with the question of whether a modest UBI, under
capitalist conditions, is a transformative reform that moves us forward,
or rather one that causes us to regress. One argument from the post-work
side is that even a modest UBI would undermine the “work ethic” that
provides ideological support for capitalism, whilst preparing us
psychologically for the “[new technological
revolution](https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/05/john-mcdonnell-labour-universal-basic-income-welfare-benefits-compass-report)”.
This work ethic is certainly functional for capitalism, but it is less
clear why we should see it as a barrier to change, and it is not clear
why a UBI as such would undermine it. A campaign for a UBI might contest
this ideology of work (and highlight how labour has ceased to benefit
from productivity increases), but so too can campaigns for shorter
working times and better life-work balance.

Another tactic is to present a UBI not as a welfare transfer but as a
“dividend” from a stock of capital that is collectively created and/or
held by society (“knowledge capital”, “social capital”, etc.). But this
draws upon and reinforces the idea that income is a matter of right
derived from property. As equal shareholders in public capital, it is
implied that we are entitled to equal dividends. If this is true,
however, then surely the owners of private capital stock have a right to
their dividends as well?

The mainstream UBI debate, of course, is really mostly about welfare
reform. Here, its usefulness integrates claims about efficiency, the
dignity afforded to beneficiaries, and public acceptability. For
example, John McDonnell has linked the idea of UBI to his [experience
with child
benefit](https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/labour-sets-up-working-group-to-investigate-radical-idea-of-basic-income-john-mcdonnell-reveals-a7563566.html).
As a non-means-tested measure, child benefit was once considered a
dubious proposal, but has since proved popular among the public.

But child benefit is not like a UBI. Neither are means-tested, but child
benefit is need-determined, not universal. The arbiter of need is the
(bureaucratically-determined) presence of children, which is recognized
as implying a greater household need for income. There seems to be
widespread acceptance for means-tested progressive taxation (from each
according to their ability!) and for need-determined benefits like child
benefit, pensions or disability benefits (to each according to their
need!). Acceptance is most fragile where beneficiaries’ inability to
look after themselves is popularly called into question (the unemployed,
“benefit scroungers”, etc.).

This is a problem for any UBI scheme. As described above, the scope for
funding it from the capital share is limited. This means it is likely to
be largely a transfer from the better-paid to the less well-paid, and
from those who work to those who do not. Unlike child benefit, its
acceptability will depend on persuading people that it is good to work
and pay taxes so that other people do not have to. This is likely to be
a hard sell.

The acceptability of child benefit rests on the perception that people
do not have equal needs, making need-determined distribution more
efficient more efficient than universal provision. For the same reason,
need-determined distribution provides greater security because people
who need a bigger cushion can get one, or because help is targeted at
occasions of need, such as the loss of work or the advent of illness.
Benefits that are means-tested or conditional on behavior can be
bureaucratically wasteful and intrusive, but cases like child benefit
show that means need be tested only once (at taxation) and that much
needs-testing can be reduced to simple objective criteria. We also need
to push the idea that sometimes it is better to give claimants the
benefit of the doubt, to create a more humane and efficient welfare
system.

Finally, we need to be wary of the assertion that the assessment of need
by the state is always suspect, and that equality of benefits is in
principle good. From this, it is but a small step to just handing out
equal vouchers to spend on private healthcare and education. It is but
another small step to the idea that all means-testing is bad and tax
should always be flat. The libertarian support for UBI is not for
nothing, after all.

Marxist debates can help us understand UBI’s alluring vision. Only by
transcending capitalism, however, can we ever reach that vision. Until
then, it seems destined to be a disappointment: as a welfare system, it
is sub-optimal; ideologically, it may be, on balance, unhelpful; and as
a potential subsidy of low-paid and precarious employment, it may even
become regressive.

More promising transformative reforms lie elsewhere. We can strengthen
and deepen democracy. We can raise the labour share of income at the
expense of speculative and rentier incomes through instruments such as
land value taxation, reducing the political power of capital as a whole.
Lastly, we can begin to foster the growth of public, worker-owned and
similar alternative forms of ownership at the gradual expense of the
purely capitalist sector. While a UBI scheme is likely to become
subordinate to the requirements of the capitalist mode of production,
such policy options can help build the foundations for socialism.
