Escaping the Black Dog's Shadow
===============================

**[Nic Murray](https://twitter.com/nic__murray)**

Several weeks ago, Johann Hari told us that [everything we knew about
depression was
wrong](https://www.theguardian.com/society/2018/jan/07/is-everything-you-think-you-know-about-depression-wrong-johann-hari-lost-connections).
As an opening gambit for any new book it was a brave one, never mind it
coming from a [disgraced investigative
journalist](https://deterritorialsupportgroup.wordpress.com/2011/06/17/hari-karihackery/).
Hari’s claims, excerpted in The Guardian were doubly dubious, partially
based on dubious statistics and where more reliable rather less new than
the book’s title claimed with depression having causes external to the
brain known by and taught to healthcare professionals for
[decades](https://twitter.com/ProfLAppleby/status/950800168366018560).
Even to those outside the healthcare profession, the suggestion that we
were unaware that mental health problems were socially determined is at
best disingenuous and at worst actively harmful. Speak to anyone who is
depressed or mentally distressed in de-industrialized towns, or
[forgotten seaside
resorts](https://www.ft.com/content/b6dbf34e-c987-11e7-aa33-c63fdc9b8c6c),
and they’ll tell you it’s not because they’re a biologically distinct
tribe to the residents of Kensington (or at least Kensington’s richer
residents). Perhaps because the vast majority of what they, or anyone
facing oppression or systemic injustice, know about depression, is
right.

The ‘You’ that Hari was addressing in his article and book isn’t really
any of these people though. Looking at the sleeve of *Lost Connections*,
adorned with gushing quotes by everyone from Matt Haig to Elton John,
the desired audience for his piece and book becomes clearer. The ‘You’
conjures up the commentariat and mainstream media narrative that
currently exists around mental health - a narrative that for years has
ceaselessly circled around the need to ‘speak out’ and ‘break the
stigma’, and has become so hollowed out and devoid of real insight that
the Royal Family is able to enter into the fray, [clearly signifying the
debate as wholly
apolitical](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/apr/20/mental-health-royal-family-government-children-illness).
If this is the space into which Hari intended to launch his book then
the suggestion that social factors can influence our mental health would
undoubtedly be seen as a novel take. Reading his book makes clear that
his years of jetsetting to uncover the truth about mental health only
produces a series of ahistorical and unlinked anecdotes, giving rise to
individualised self-help hacks. Rather than collectively piling in on
the flaws in this, there’s a need to present a counter narrative that
listens to the voice of survivors to understand how we got to this
apolitical space, and consider what is our way out.

The black dog’s shadow
----------------------

In March 2006, a statue appeared in Norwich of depicting [Winston
Churchill constrained by a straight
jacket](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/4795832.stm). It later turned
out the 9ft figure was commissioned by mental health charity Rethink as
part of a campaign to tackle mental health stigma. This served as
something of a harbinger for the years to come, both for mental health
policy and discourse. This was a period in which the space to discuss
the politics of mental health was chipped away - and then colonised by
the third sector- a process that could loosely be termed the ‘black
dog-ification’ of mental health. Looking at the figure, Churchill was
undoubtedly chosen by Rethink (and [later Time to
Change](https://www.time-to-change.org.uk/news/would-his-depression-have-stopped-churchill-becoming-pm-modern-britain))
as a mental health icon due to his writings on the ‘black dog’ that
visited him during periods of poor mental health. It mattered little
that Churchill was also[in favour of compulsory labour camps for those
he saw as ‘mentally
defective’](https://broadly.vice.com/en_us/article/ae55v8/winston-churchill-racist-warmonger-sterilize-mentally-ill),
the function he and his black dog served was perfect for the myopic
vision of the next decade’s mental health campaigning.

Perhaps most immediately harmful in the conjuring of a ‘black dog’
associated with mental health problems is that it encouraged people to
see their distress as [something external and, even more importantly,
inexplicable](https://medium.com/@tristandross/a-critique-of-the-genre-of-mental-health-writing-part-one-6084087f71a3).
Though metaphor at times has its merits, this process can serve to
prevent us from establishing the triggers and underlying causes of our
symptoms, and ultimately hinder debate by refusing to name structural
causes of mental illness. The ‘black-dog’ anti-stigma approach to mental
health can then claim progress by encouraging discussion of a sanitised
image of mental health, with a dark unnamed cause lurking at the edges,
invoking sympathy for those who did not choose to be visited by this
creature. The anti-stigma initiative [has been described as a process of
‘benevolent othering,’ which speaks of others in ways that are
ostensibly positive but which function to maintain their subordination
to capitalist market
forces](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s00127-017-1393-x.pdf).
Mark Fisher famously wrote on the [privatisation of
stress](http://www.newleftproject.org/index.php/site/article_comments/the_privatisation_of_stress),
encouraged by capitalist systems to further exploit a workforce
conditioned to dissociate work stresses from their mental health. The
encouragement of this dissociation was perhaps exemplified by 2017’s
World Mental Health Day with its theme of workplace wellbeing. Amid the
[current crisis of
work](https://popularresistance.org/against-meaninglessness-and-precarity-the-crisis-of-work/),
it’s an incredible sleight of hand that such a theme aims to reconcile
us with distressing work, while also championing the employers
responsible for their ‘mental health awareness’. As David Frayne pithily
remarked at the time: “[dare we imagine a Mental Health Day on the theme
of 'inequality', or
'capitalism'?](https://twitter.com/TheWorkDogma/status/917650823588601857)”

The ‘black dog’ has further aided market forces through the
commodification of mental health, [creating a new social
issue](https://www.vice.com/en_uk/article/9ammqv/how-mental-health-became-the-new-feminism)
that brands can tack onto products, or, in some cases, help to target
[individuals whose online search
behaviour](https://www.vice.com/en_us/article/pg7d59/when-facebook-and-instagram-thinks-youre-depressed)
might indicate they are distressed with consumption proffered as the
solution. The sole intervention into markets for the cause of our mental
health has been to prevent the sale of stigmatising halloween costumes -
an incredibly minor disruption in a two week period of the consumer
capitalist calendar, but one that has been [heralded as a key
win](https://twitter.com/TimetoChange/status/917408312794136577) of the
now decade old Time to Change campaign, into which the government has
poured [at least £20 million to
date](https://www.gov.uk/government/news/time-to-change-tackling-mental-health-stigma).
If the anti-stigma campaign, and the work of mental health charities,
have only ever sought to evoke sympathy and place a slight veneer over
the ongoing atrocities of neoliberalism, what then is to be made of
mental health charities’ complicity with a system that repeatedly
punishes those they claim to represent?

The co-option of recovery
-------------------------

"The message we want to portray is that it is possible to recover from
mental illness and overcome it and be successful - because Churchill is
an example of someone who was able to do that" was the statement put out
by Rethink following the stunt. The role recovery plays in this
statement is significant, as it’s closely followed by an expectation
that this involves overcoming mental illness and being ‘successful’.
This emphasis on recovery as ‘success’ within the narrowly defined
purposes of existing society stands in stark contrast to the conception
of the Recovery Model that held its roots in the civil rights movements
of the 60/70s. Emerging during this time the movement sought to question
power, and emphasised the [importance of autonomy and
self-determination](https://www.madinamerica.com/2016/02/recovery-compromise-or-liberation/).
Ultimately, however, such radical potential was defanged allowing
aspects to be reorganised in ways useful to the purposes of the state
and capital.

Much of the third sector in the 00s heralded the notion of recovery as a
sea change for mental health services. Rather than focusing on deficits,
people would be encouraged to become experts in their own self-care and
pursue their aspirations and goals. Within this new recovery framework,
service users were recast as ‘experts by experience’ and framed as
equals alongside professionals, working together to
[“co-produce](https://www.mind.org.uk/information-support/your-stories/co-production-in-mental-health-why-everybody-wins/#.Wne3kahl_IU)”
mental health services. These were all nice rhetorical flourishes, but
processes which were [fundamentally incompatible with the third
sector](http://thenewmentalhealth.org/?p=294). Uneven power dynamics
that limited the input of service users and the expectations of funders
meant that these efforts were bound by the [neoliberal impact-driven
nature of the
sector](https://newsocialist.org.uk/overthrowing-the-big-society-the-third-sectors-neoliberal-embrace/),
and “pursue your aspirations and goals” became “be successful” on our
metric driven terms. The drying up of funding post-financial crash meant
that many of the smaller, [more radical user led groups lost funding or
were
outbid](http://www.disabilitynewsservice.com/more-than-220-member-groups-of-mental-health-network-close-in-two-years/)
by these growing impact-driven charities presenting a homogenous
definition of recovery.

The idea of work as a cure was central to the new conception of
recovery, with employment being seen as a [key outcome of mental health
treatment](http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/dr-jay-watts/mental-health_b_10769174.html)
and job-seekers expected to be work-ready, with a [positive mindset and
disposition](https://theconversation.com/facing-psychological-coercion-and-manipulation-has-become-a-daily-part-of-claiming-benefits-42839).
The work cure as a capital based intervention also serves as an ideology
through which to manage its own reproduction even as it produces and
amplifies distress and melancholic apathy. Writing on the "political
economy of unhappiness" [William
Davies](https://newleftreview.org/II/71/william-davies-the-political-economy-of-unhappiness)
noted that these states currently represent the “critical negative
externalit\[ies\] of contemporary capitalism.” As work becomes
progressively more atomised and service based, and constant cognitive
attention online is required to drive profits, this mental malaise
strips the ideal neoliberal subject of their enterprise and desire to
better themselves as well as limiting their consumptive capacities.
[Marx notes
how](https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch15.htm),

> Capitalist production, therefore, develops technology, and the
> combining together of various processes into a social whole, only by
> sapping the original sources of all wealth — the soil and the
> labourer.
>
> This provides a framework for thinking about unhappiness as a major
> contemporary way in which the worker as source of wealth is sapped and
> then of interventions on this terrain as a means of securing capital’s
> reproduction as cheaply and in a way as compatible with capitalism’s
> interests and purposes as possible. [Davies
> again](https://newleftreview.org/II/71/william-davies-the-political-economy-of-unhappiness)highlights
> how the work cure serves to aid capitalism’s reproduction across all
> these levels: The depressed employee is stricken by a chronic
> deflation… which can lead him or her to feel economically useless, and
> consequently more depressed. The workplace therefore acquires a
> therapeutic function, for if people can somehow be persuaded to remain
> in work despite mental or physical illness, then their self-esteem
> will be prevented from falling too low, and their bio-psycho-economic
> potential might be rescued.

Against the backdrop of austerity, the links between mental health
charities and ‘work cure’ have flourished. Mind have [bid for contracts
with](https://www.disabilitynewsservice.com/mind-boss-lies-to-protesters-over-dwp-contracts/)
- and [seconded a senior member of their team to - the Department of
Work and Pensions
(DWP)](https://www.mind.org.uk/news-campaigns/mind-and-back-to-work-support/dwp-secondment/),
while maintaining a doublespeak that also enabled them to condemn
conditionality and sanctions. Until last month, Conservative MP Esther
McVey sat on the [advisory board of the
Samaritans](https://www.samaritans.org/news/samaritans-advisory-board).
Even prior to her appointment as Secretary of State for Work and
Pensions, this was an MP who is consistently voted to decrease
disability benefits, leaving those facing the brunt of cuts to benefits
and services wondering - is there anywhere truly left to turn?

Missed connections
------------------

In the immediate aftermath of Hari’s piece and the launch of his book,
many rallied against him claiming it was dangerous to allow him such a
prominent place in the mental health debate. The issue is that the way
in which we talk about mental health is already dangerous, serving to
privatise our distress, to placate us with toxic work practices and
further entrench the creeping neo-liberalisation of the third sector.
These processes feed off each other and leave us without any clear
solutions of how to overcome them. If we truly want to escape the shadow
cast over the last decade by this black dog, a key aim must be to break
the link between work and treatment that have now become so tightly
fused. From this we can consider how the principles of autonomy and
self-determination could once again be reclaimed in both these spaces.

Working isn’t working
---------------------

Hari’s suggestion to readers to simply ‘democratize your workplace’
wilfully avoids the fact that a fight for mental health at work cannot
be won through individual action but must involve collective agitation
and organisation against employers and the forces of capital. However,
resistance to work no longer manifests itself in an organised voice, but
through a wide range of mental distresses. [322,000 working days were
lost due to industrial
disputes](https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/workplacedisputesandworkingconditions/articles/labourdisputes/latest)
in 2016, [while 12.5 million were lost due to work related stress,
anxiety or
depression](http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/causdis/stress/stress.pdf)
in the same year. The overall trend in sick days is declining, but those
taken due to mental ill health seem to be rising: we are bearing the
brunt of the current crisis of work individually - and often silently -
and need to take collective action. Trade unions must re-emphasise the
vital role they can play to support workers’ mental health that has
always been at the movement’s core. Every bargain negotiated by trade
unions provides a benefit to workers’ collective mental health, as the
Trade Union Congress (TUC)’s 1880 annual report states: “In a normal
state of things wages at any given time and place should not fall
below...whatever the contemporary local civilisation recognises as
indispensable for physical and mental health.” The new normal should not
be a situation where [two in every five employed
people](http://neweconomics.org/2017/08/bad_jobs/) in the UK are in work
that doesn’t provide a secure, living wage. Nor should a commitment to
mental health be merely a tick box exercise on top of toxic work
practices and structures, where it is easier and cheaper for employers
to prescribe a wellness course for individuals than to change how a
workplace is organised.

Going further, trade unions can integrate with growing demands on the
left for a [‘politics of
time’](https://markcarrigan.net/2016/04/17/the-politics-of-time-and-the-possibility-of-democracy/)
that questions the embedded nature of the work ethic and calls for
greater freedom and autonomy. These calls are situated between the
neo-classical perspective of work in itself being the opposite of
utility, and the more modern economic view of employment as a wholly
positive force for mental health, alleviating the suffering caused by
unemployment. Rather than encouraging workers to instill meaning to
their roles, or to simply follow what they love, such a project has
broader aims in rejecting the assertion that work is inherently good,
and instead emphasizing how[a better sharing out of good work can
benefit
society](https://www.opendemocracy.net/neweconomics/need-4-day-week-tackle-multiple-crises-work/).
This rebalancing could provide mental health benefits at both ends of
the scale. Last year, workers were estimated to have put in [2.1 billion
hours of unpaid
overtime](https://www.tuc.org.uk/news/workers-uk-put-%C2%A3336-billion-worth-unpaid-overtime-year),
a working pattern associated with a host of mental and cardiovascular
strains. Moreover, with the contemporary world of work defined by [high
insecurity, low control and high
demands](https://www.tuc.org.uk/news/zero-hours-contracts-allow-bosses-treat-workers-%E2%80%9Cdisposable-labour%E2%80%9D-says-tuc),
most notably in the numbers of workers employed on zero hours contracts,
much vaunted flexibility has severe impacts on workers’ mental health.
Beyond paid work, unwaged work, often entailing tremendous amounts of
physical and emotional labour, continues to be overwhelmingly [carried
out by women](https://visual.ons.gov.uk/the-value-of-your-unpaid-work/),
a vast inequality that not only erodes women’s free time, but also their
own mental health and happiness, with [middle aged women being two
thirds more likely to suffer work stress than
men](http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/causdis/stress/stress.pdf?pdf=stress).

Listening to survivors
----------------------

A lot of the focus of Hari’s book will be on the fact he has recycled
his evidence while describing his conclusions as novel and this
[reinforces his reputation as a
plagiarist](https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/sep/14/johann-hari-apologises-orwell-prize).
What also should not be ignored, however, is that many of the solutions
Hari proposes are watered down presentations of the more necessary and
radical demands already being called for by numerous survivor groups.
When discussing the scarring effects of childhood trauma on our mental
health, Hari speaks with Dr. Robert Anda, the director of the ['90s ACE
study on
trauma](https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/acestudy/about.html), who
he quotes as saying that the study’s findings made him realise it’s time
to stop asking “what’s wrong” and instead ask “what’s happened”. This
would be novel if it hadn’t already been called for by survivors for at
least a decade earlier than the ACE study, or, at the time of Hari’s
writing, was not being asked in the NHS.

A [recent
review](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/inm.12369/abstract)
found that, at most, only a quarter of psychiatric patients are asked
about their experience of abuse or violence, despite the Department of
Health requiring staff to ask this question [since
2003](http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20120503230231/http:/www.dh.gov.uk/prod_consum_dh/groups/dh_digitalassets/@dh/@en/documents/digitalasset/dh_4072069.pdf).
Even if patients are asked about these experiences, the current mental
healthcare system is ill equipped to give people the space and time to
work through this trauma. Those from more marginalised backgrounds,
already more likely to have experienced abuse and violence and often
unable to access private treatment, are faced with up to year long
waiting lists for trauma informed care or an NHS that can reinforce
abuse and trauma along axes of oppression. In the most extreme cases
people of colour are [three times more likely to be restrained in mental
health
units](https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/dec/09/women-black-patients-physically-restrained-mental-health).
However, re-traumatisation visited on patients receiving mental health
treatment through the NHS extends beyond, and can be more insidious
than, the use of restraints.

Radical therapist David Smail has suggested Thatcher’s belief that there
is no such thing as society finds "[an unacknowledged echo in almost all
approaches to
therapy](https://books.google.com/books?id=lSejDQAAQBAJ&pg=PA16&lpg=PA16&dq=an+unacknowledged+echo+in+almost+all+approaches+to+therapy&source=bl&ots=Gq35xgAZpD&sig=xhVDPpmtGmCaO4O9jBJR70dsZks)".
It is certainly the case in Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT), the
most common therapy accessed through Improving Access to Psychological
Therapies (IAPT), a program introduced by New Labour in 2008 [following
the
advice](http://cep.lse.ac.uk/pubs/download/special/depressionreport.pdf)
of economist and workfare proponent Richard Layard. In this original
advice, CBT is heralded as a means by which to overcome mental health
problems using a “here and now” approach to therapy that focuses on
negative thought patterns and problematic behaviours. This
de-contextualised approach to therapy could be seen as problem-solving,
but implicitly it encourages individuals to carry out continual
self-work to become more attractive to the labour market. The onus is on
the individual to respond almost stoically and rationally to their
negative thought processes. The issue is, however, that we exist outside
of our thoughts, in a material and systematically unjust world. People
of colour who are [already more likely to disengage with health
services](https://www.mentalhealth.org.uk/a-to-z/b/black-asian-and-minority-ethnic-bame-communities),
may be being [routinely abused by a method of
therapy](https://racereflections.co.uk/2017/07/01/culturally-biased-therapy-part-2-injustice-and-depression/)
that encourages the erasure of the structural violence they encounter.
Being in financial difficulty drastically[reduces the likelihood of
recovery from common mental health
problems](http://www.moneyandmentalhealth.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/Money-and-mental-health-the-facts-1.pdf),
and CBT is unlikely to help that; there are only so many ways you can
mentally reframe the gnawing uncertainty as to whether your landlord may
kick you out, or when the bailiffs may next come round. IAPT was sold
not only as a means by which to “cure” half of people experiencing
common mental health problems, but also to produce the largest dataset
on wellbeing in history. However, committing to such reductive
rationalism leaves you nowhere when your numbers don’t even add up:
relapse rates following [IAPT treatment are over
50%](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0005796717300840?dgcid=raven_sd_via_email),
and (ironically given what was a key selling point of IAPT in the
initial cost-benefit analysis) [as few as 5% that complete treatment
return to
work.](http://www.cost-ofliving.net/guidelines-for-depression-more-gourmet-nights-from-nice/)

Any forthcoming Labour government, alongside restoring NHS funding and
ending privatisation, needs to seriously grapple with the actual nature
of mental health treatment. A first step will involve listening to the
demands and needs of the public, as the Labour Party has in so many
other areas of policy recently. However recent evidence suggests Labour
is still wedded to an overly data driven approach to treatment. ‘For the
many not the few’ contained a [pledge to ask NICE to evaluate the
potential for increasing the range of evidence-based psychological
therapies on
offer](https://labour.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/labour-manifesto-2017.pdf#page=73).
This would sound promising if evaluating the potential to increase the
range of therapies on offer wasn’t so far removed from actually calling
for them to be increased. It appears even less promising given this is
something NICE already systematically does, having [published a draft on
its updated guidelines for depression last
July](http://www.cost-ofliving.net/old-wine-in-new-bottles-on-the-new-nice-guidelines-for-depression/).
One option put forward is the grim possibility of group CBT through
IAPT, but this suggestion isn’t surprising, as the paradigm through
which NICE evaluates its evidence is [overly-reliant on medicalised
models of mental health that serve to minimise patient preference and
need](http://www.cost-ofliving.net/guidelines-for-depression-more-gourmet-nights-from-nice/),
as well as their external context and circumstances. We may
conceptualise our distress as an illness, the result of trauma, or
social factors, but a guiding principle for treatment should one that
best validates our lived experience, and however we choose to to
understand it.

Nothing about us without us
---------------------------

In his 2010 book *Thrive*, Richard Layard remarked: “It is not
reasonable to expect much activism from those who are mentally ill or
their relatives: they are naturally reticent. It is all of us who should
be demanding change.” Though we are still left with the deep roots that
Layard was allowed to plant into mental health service provision,
thankfully time has shown the folly of his and New Labour’s
condescension and supposed benevolent managerialism. Groups like
[Recovery in the Bin](https://recoveryinthebin.org), [Disabled People
Against Cuts](https://dpac.uk.net/) and individuals like RF - whose
recent High Court Case produced the ruling that changes to Personal
Independence Payments (PIP) were [discriminatory to people with mental
health
problems](http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/disability-benefit-changes-mental-health-discrimination-high-court-ruling-mind-a8122861.html)
- are just a few examples of the vital radicalism that can only come
from survivors. Though largely overshadowed, the much heralded ‘For the
many not the few’ manifesto was also accompanied by ‘[Nothing about you
without
you](https://labour.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/manifesto-for-disabled-people-1.pdf)’,
laying out Labour’s disability policies. A strong statement on Labour’s
commitment to these issues, but also with the title, itself a rephrasing
of the call by disability activists from at least the 1980s, containing
the possible future pitfalls of this effort. Any future Labour
government would do well to ensure they don’t follow the same mistakes
as Johann Hari and others: finally hearing the calls from survivors and
appropriating them as your own is no substitute for a movement that
repeatedly listens to and places survivors at its core.
