New Economics Conference: Housing Session
=========================================

**[Wendy Liu](https://twitter.com/dellsystem)**

The UK’s housing crisis has gotten to the point where it has ceased to
feel like news and instead seems like a fact of life. We’ve moved past
concerned op-eds and into resigned acceptance, with the crisis beginning
to feel like a permanent background fixture. The scale of the problem is
so enormous that it sometimes feels unreal, of almost farcical
proportions. Clearly, something has to be done.

So why hasn’t something been done? Why does the problem still persist?
After all, the standard narrative is that the crisis is merely the
predictable result of urban population growth coupled with a shortage of
housebuilding. Surely the solution is simply to build more houses, by
any means necessary.

This breakout session, moderated by Emma Dent Coad MP and featuring
writer Anna Minton, Bristol councillor Paul Smith and journalist Dawn
Foster, served as an important counterweight to that view. Over and
over, the panelists reinforced that the housing crisis is not just a
straightforward problem of supply failing to keep up with demand.
Rather, the crisis is structural, with deep economic roots that are
decades in the making and intimately entwined with the neoliberal
assumption that housing provision is best left to the market. As a
result, there is no solution to the crisis that does not involve
challenging the commodity nature of housing.

Looming like a shadow over the session was the tragedy of Grenfell, a
reminder that consequences of the housing crisis are not just economic;
when decisions around housing are dictated by financial concerns, the
human costs can be visceral.

Anna Minton on the housing bubble
---------------------------------

Minton began with a brief summary of her 2017 book [Big
Capital](https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jun/12/big-capital-who-is-london-for-anna-minton-review),
which covers the economic underpinnings of the current crisis. She
focused on the fact that housing has become an asset, lending a
speculative element to the market that means housing prices are not
simply a matter of supply and demand. Instead, housing prices in the
UK—and especially in London, the epicentre of the crisis—are more
influenced by patterns in global financial flows. Increasingly, property
developers don’t even pretend that their luxury flats are meant to serve
local communities; they’re deliberately marketed as assets in places
like Hong Kong, to wealthy elites who often keep the property empty
because they treat it as a safe investment rather than as a place to
live.

The result is an economy that is structurally dependent on the continued
existence of the housing crisis. Minton goes into greater detail in her
book about the mechanics of the inflated housing market, and how price
increases at the very top—driven primarily by the London housing
market’s attractiveness to global capital—cascade downward in a perverse
“trickle-down” effect, resulting in price increases at all stages of the
property ladder. At the very bottom, the consequence is “state-led
gentrification”: for local councils, the rising costs of housing in the
private market result in a “rent gap”, whereby the public rent is much
lower than the potential rent if the property were sold off and
converted into luxury flats. As a result, the prospect of continuing
their responsibility to provide social housing is much less attractive
than selling off land to private developers, not least due to
increasingly limiting budget constraints among local councils.

Minton’s assessment is that the situation is not sustainable. All the
signs point to a structural instability in the market, and like a
pyramid scheme, it will eventually come crashing down. In the meantime,
though, the crisis is taking a huge toll on those at the bottom: having
to live in poor quality accommodation (if any); constantly on the move;
stuck in a state of financial insecurity because of high rents.

Minton then proposed that the way forward lies in empowering councils to
build more housing. For Minton, this does not mean public-private
partnerships along the lines of what the Haringey Development Vehicle
would have been; it means building social housing *outside* the markets,
without councils behaving like private developers.

Minton further suggested that planning permission should be decided by
the local community, a proposal which even has cross-party support. This
would help bring down the inflated value of land, as it would make it
harder for private developers to build luxury flats or [shopping
centres](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-42719607) that
offer little value to local communities.

The major theme running throughout Minton's talk is that incremental
change is not enough. Instead, we need a step change, whereby we
dramatically rewrite the rules of the system. The depth of the problem
we’re facing now is one that cannot be fixed in a lasting way without
completely reversing the trend towards a more liberalised housing
market. We need a structural transformation, in which local governments
take on a dramatically greater role in housing provision and the
practice of speculative house-building is put to an end.

Minton concluded by emphasising that the present situation is a matter
of political choice, not economic necessity. After all, Germany doesn’t
have the same speculative housing economy. Decisions made by previous
governments, including Margaret Thatcher’s right-to-buy policies, have
all served to entrench the treatment of housing as an asset instead of a
right, and that view of housing is what lies at the root of our current
problem.

Paul Smith on local government
------------------------------

As the Cabinet Member for Housing in Bristol, Smith offered a different
perspective, rooted in specific instances of what has been accomplished
on the local level in Bristol, where the council has been pushing the
limits of what is and isn’t possible when it comes to housing. Recently,
the council has been taking public land off the market, in recognition
of the fact that the private developers who purchase it often engage in
land-banking. This practice involves securing planning permissions and
then waiting until the land increases in value before even beginning to
build, in order to hedge their risks. The more egregious version of this
doesn’t involve any building at all—some simply sell off the land to
another buyer, serving as middlemen for a wholly unnecessary transaction
and fetching a comfortable margin the process.

Smith then criticised of the current definition of “affordable”
housing—80% of market rate—as an absurdity, not least because of the
current inflated market, and suggested a better definition which would
be pegged to housing allowance instead of market value. Although local
governments don’t have much power to contest this definition, they do at
least have the ability to choose who to evict: Bristol has agreed to
halt evictions for those who are negatively affected by welfare reform,
for instance.

On the other hand, local governments are still quite financially
constrained. In Bristol, they’ve had to build some new houses for sale
just to be able to pay for council housing. Still, though, they’ve tried
to make that into as positive a development as possible, with a view
toward remodelling rather than regenerating—building these houses within
existing estates rather than tearing them down and rebuilding; hiring
locals for construction work; reducing rent for existing council housing
tenants.

One custom that local governments have in their favour is the fact that
unlike other public bodies, they are not required to sell land to the
highest bidder—they can take into account perceived social value when
assessing which bid to take. This gives them some degree of freedom, and
means they don’t necessarily have to sell land for some cash in the
short term at the expense of eroding their capabilities in the long
term.

Dawn Foster on social impact
----------------------------

Last to speak was Foster on the social aspects of the housing crisis. As
a journalist who has been covering housing for years, Foster has written
extensively about the impact of temporary accommodation and homelessness
on the individuals affected. Although temporary accommodation is usually
meant to be limited to 6 weeks, in practice it could last for much
longer. Tenants—who are sometimes accompanied by very young
children—often have to share facilities with strangers, and there can be
long-term mental and physical health effects resulting from stress as
well as exposure to toxins. The most frustrating aspect of the situation
is that it’s not even economically efficient; temporary accommodation
tends to cost councils much more than actually providing council
housing, as tenants are usually charged per night, and the profits go to
private companies.

For those who don’t qualify for temporary accommodation, the situation
is even worse. Foster told the story of a pregnant woman who had to
sleep rough because she wouldn’t qualify for temporary accommodation
until she had given birth, due to the local council’s stringent policies
on the matter.

Foster then emphasised the detrimental societal impacts of the housing
crisis even for those who do have longer-term accommodation. Many people
her age, she said, end up having to move every year because landlords
decide to raise the rent. As a result, they rarely get to feel like
they’re part of their local community, which can lead to feelings of
isolation. Furthermore, an unstable housing situation can affect whether
they choose to start families, which could have larger-scale demographic
effects.

Foster ended by proposing some solutions. In the short term, we need
stronger tenants’ rights, combined with harsher regulation around who is
allowed to be a landlord. In the long term, more housing should be
socially owned, with a reduction in private ownership in favour of
lifelong tenancies instead. Right-to-buy should be ended, as it only
results in money—especially housing benefit—going to private landlords
instead of circulating within the local community. Councils selling off
public assets should be seen for what it is: a one-time action with only
short-term gain and that only results in the council abrogating its
duties in the long term.

On local councils
-----------------

During the audience questions, the topic of HDV was raised, followed by
the question of *why* Haringey council felt like it had no choice but to
enter into a partnership with Lendlease. Why, the questioner asked,
can’t local councils like Haringey—which has billions of pounds worth of
assets—simply borrow money to build more housing?

Minton responded that this solution, as straightforward as it sounds, is
unfortunately not entirely possible within the present system; there are
many restrictions on what councils are legally allowed to do. Smith
followed by clarifying that the reason councils cannot simply borrow is
the result of central government diktat, and that the only real way to
change this is to change the government. Such a change is a necessary
(though not sufficient) step toward fixing the housing crisis, as it is
the only way to ensure local councils are free to build houses at scale.

Toward decommodification
------------------------

Near the end of the session, a provocative question was raised from a
member of the audience: Given the scale of the problems at hand, why was
the manifesto so timid when it came to housing? After all, what we’ve
heard in this session points to a major, systemic issue requiring
radical solutions. So why didn’t the manifesto make bolder promises?

The obvious answer is that the public—and even the party itself—isn’t
yet ready for that. We’re already seeing a schism within the party as a
result of opposing views on how best to handle the housing crisis. The
internal battle over the [Haringey Development
Vehicle](/we-took-the-last-option-the-fight-for-democracy-in-haringey/)
can be seen as symbolic of a larger ideological chasm within Labour,
between those who believe that housing should not be a commodity and
those who feel that some element of commodification is necessary in the
current economic landscape. While the current leadership of the party
appears to be on the former side, there is still strong resistance to
that perspective within Labour’s own ranks in Westminster and beyond.

Ultimately, this has to change. As David Madden and Peter Marcuse write
in [In Defense of
Housing](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2016/10/housing-crisis-rent-landlords-homeless-affordability):

> Reversing the commodity character of housing must be the core of any
> answer to the housing crisis.

Such a reversal would represent a fundamental shift in how housing is
viewed. This won't be easy to achieve, given how much of the UK economy
depends precisely on housing being a commodity, but it can happen if
there is enough political will. What we need to do now is to build a
social movement around the issue, not just to get Labour councils
elected in May, but to create the political consciousness needed to push
for the decommodification of housing on a larger scale. Only through
decommodification can we fix the housing crisis.

*A previous version of this piece mistakenly attributed comments by Anna
Minton to John Healey MP, who was mentioned but was not present at the
discussion. In addition, the presence of Emma Dent Coad as moderator was
omitted. Thanks to Dawn Foster for the corrections.*
