New Economics Conference: Introductory Session
==============================================

**[Tom Gann](https://twitter.com/Tom_Gann)**

Gareth Thomas
-------------

Thomas emphasised, in particular, John McDonnell’s long record of
interest in the matters to be discussed, drawing on his role at the GLC,
mentioning in particular his role in empowering of local communities to
control their lives in the case of Coin Street. It’s crucial to note,
despite the efforts to portray McDonnell as an Old Left dinosaur, his
long, consistent record of support for and learning from social movement
struggles, grassroots community organisations, including those outside
the traditional working class-party relation and his openness to new
ideas, social forces and modern democratic struggles.

John McDonnell
--------------

McDonnell argued that the movement had placed questions of economic
ownership and, crucially, control back on the political agenda, but
significant work remains to be done (and the movement is capable of this
work) in developing ideas and implications. Here, and running through
the conference, popular participation was stressed both in terms of
policy formulation and in the capacity of a movement to generate and
educate around alternative purposes.

McDonnell continued discussing two strands of what Labour in government
will have to do. We would describe these as a politics of relief on the
one hand and a long revolutionary transformation on the other (though at
certain points, especially in the “Preston Model”, a politics of relief
requires initiating policies with a long revolutionary horizon). The
politics of relief describes a politics, discussed by McDonnell, of as
rapid as possible repair of welfare, education and health through
spending paid for by increased taxation on the highest incomes and
corporations. This politics of relief is vital but, in a sense
non-transformative, presuming broadly speaking, an unreformed economy
except around tax and spend redistribution, it is also extremely
vulnerable to capital’s class war from above resisting even a marginally
increased tax burden. Corbynism’s long revolutionary politics, by
contrast, is that root and branch radical transformation of the economy
embodied in The Alternative Models of Ownership report and in the
discussions at the conference. For Corbynism to achieve its potential
both are vital and the potential risk of foregrounding the politics of
relief and dragging Corbynism back into integration with existing
society is perhaps the greatest, precisely because there are good,
materially grounded reasons for this loss of longer, more radical
horizon, threat to this potential.

Corresponding with the line of the argument suggesting the need for a
politics of relief and a long revolutionary transition away from
capitalism towards democratic control of the economy, McDonnell argued
that the current economic model holds us back, not only in recessions
and their wakes but in general- crisis is not a break from normal
functioning of the system but the intensification of its general
tendencies in such a way that it makes the system’s normal functioning
legible. A politics of relief would correspond to attempts to address
the crisis within the terms of the system’s functioning, a long
revolutionary politics the transcendence of this normal functioning. For
McDonnell, and even more centrally Corbyn in his closing address, a,
probably the, most important aspect of the general functioning of the
system is its exploitation of the environment and the malign
consequences of this.

A further encouraging aspect of McDonnell’s speech was his grasp of the
urgency of formulating plans to being the long revolutionary
transformation coupled with not using this urgency as an alibi for
authoritarian, top-down policy making in the name of efficiency. Urgency
is not a question of leaving things to the (conventionally legitimated)
experts but, largely, as a spur for more “fresh and challenging thinking
from the movement”. There is, of course, some technical work to be
carried out by these narrowly defined experts, and McDonnell pointed to
John Trickett’s role in preparing for government. Central to Trickett’s
work, with the collapse of Carillion a particular spur to work, is an
investigation of what it would take to restore central government
procurement capacity (there are analogous and perhaps harder to address
questions with local government too). The current form of outsourcing
entails both contracts being awarded on an extremely narrow set of
criteria and companies like Carillion, Serco and Capita substituting for
the procurement capacity that should be directly exercised by local and
national government, as [Grace Blakeley has
argued](https://medium.com/@graceblakeley/carillions-missing-millions-9090a6ee84d8),
“merely act\[ing\] as arbiters between a Government that lacks the
desire or capacity to do proper public procurement and the suppliers
that end up doing the work, extracting millions from taxpayers in the
process.” Insourcing would require a significant extension of civil
service capacities.

However, much of the necessary and urgent development of policy ideas is
much more participatory, involving a significant extension of what is
recognised as expertise. This also involves the understanding that the
2017 manifesto is not as some within Corbynism or on the traditional
(i.e. non-Blairite) Labour Right for whom the election result shows the
viability of some left economic policies, the end point but only the
beginning. As McDonnell argued, “deepening and developing our
commitments requires detailed implementation plans” and we “need to hit
the ground running when we come into government.” The participatory
nature of these plans owes a great deal, and often this was explicitly
acknowledged, to the popular planning tendency in the GLC and to Hilary
Wainwright and Robin Murray’s work and the consequences to be drawn from
the claim “workers are the real experts”, and for McDonnell, it is
essential to learn from the everyday experience of those who really run
industries, those who spend their lives in them.

Emphasising and mobilising popular capacities to run industries is not
only a moral claim but one that is pragmatic both economically and
politically. It is economically pragmatic precisely because the
knowledge of workers (and also service users) will allow industries to
be run more efficiently. It is worth noting here the very strong
emphasis on efficiency but a different sort of efficiency to the narrow
capitalist version in the tradition coming out of the GLC, one that
emphasises the efficient satisfaction of needs and the inability of
market mechanisms to do this, as the 1985 *London Industrial Strategy*
begins (a document discussed by both Hilary Wainwright and Jeremy
Corbyn), “when the history of Britain’s experiment with monetarism comes
to be written, the contrast between unmet needs and vast human and
financial waste will be the theme” [^chapter-8-1]- it should be clear
the same could be said with British neoliberalism of whatever political
stripe more widely. Alongside this economically pragmatic justification,
popular participation also has a politically pragmatic justification,
the long revolutionary or becoming hegemonic aspect involves the changes
in forms of ownership becoming irreversible, and, as McDonnell argued
everyone owning, everyone controlling, everyone taking an interest, will
build the kinds of broad and where necessary intense popular support
that will make the new forms of public ownership significantly less
vulnerable to privatisation compared to the old nationalised industries
where the lack of a democratic stake limited popular defence.

The critique, sometimes implied, sometimes explicit of the postwar
nationalisations and the stress on the future oriented implications of
welcoming in popular creativity force long revolutionary policies beyond
nostalgia, beyond Tony Judt’s “social democracy of fear”, beyond “The
Spirit of ‘45”, beyond treating 1979 as the fall and a return to
pre-Thatcherite economic and welfare forms as the best than can be hoped
for. Firstly, McDonnell insisted that the new alternative forms of
ownership would extend far beyond those industries privatised by the
Tories. More generally, against Corbynism as an Old Labour (whether of
left or right) politics, McDonnell made central the New Left critique of
1945-79 and even more significantly its energies, attitudes and styles,
to allow for the possibility of constructing something genuinely modern.

The rejection of 1945-79 as the limit of socialist ambition not only
involves rethinking public ownership but at the very least an extension
and modernisation of the post-’45 welfare settlement. UBI was mentioned
in passing but it increasingly feels like (and this is welcome) it is no
longer being considered as a viable, serious solution. Instead of UBI
McDonnell emphasised Universal Basic Services, with the question posed,
“why are the basic needs of life not free at the point of use?”. This
free access to the necessities of life, moreover, was posed as an
extension of the widely accepted principles of the NHS. [Grace
Blakeley](https://newsocialist.org.uk/universal-basic-services-wont-fix-our-economy/)
has explored the notion of UBS for us, and it is clear that its
superiority to both UBI and the current welfare settlement lies in the
decommodification of the meeting of needs, and indeed, in the
prioritising of the meeting of needs over the demands and forms of
organisation of the market. Again, there is not only a moral claim here
but an efficiency as with the contrast between the NHS and US
healthcare, the likely far greater efficiency in meeting needs through
collective provision. UBS even beyond the mean, affordability focused
version of the [UCL
report](https://www.ucl.ac.uk/bartlett/igp/news/2017/oct/igps-social-prosperity-network-publishes-uks-first-report-universal-basic-services),
however, should only be seen as a minimum programme and one that cannot
be detached from the wider transformation of economy to ensure the
efficient, democratically controlled meeting of the most expansive
understanding of need. Indeed, with what actually constitutes a need
being understood as a major reformist, with potentially revolutionary
implications, struggle under capitalism as with Marx’s “[historical and
moral
element](https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch06.htm)”
of the value of labour power. Moreover, even an expansive, struggled for
definition of need is insufficient, it is also necessary to insist on
collective human development, as Raymond Williams wrote, describing the
ethical, institutional culture and values of the working class,

> Society... as the positive means for all kinds of development,
> including individual development. Development and advantage are not
> individually but commonly interpreted. The provision of the means of
> life will alike in production and distribution be collective and
> mutual.[^chapter-8-2]

Going beyond the post-1945 nationalisations, particularly their lack of
democratic control, also entails a striking hegemonic move (and implicit
at various points in the Alternative Models agenda are moves that aim at
integrating people and arguments who might be thought of likely
opponents). McDonnell, on the one hand, concedes an aspect of the
right-wing critique (but only an aspect, quite rightly, for example, it
was insisted that the nationalised industries were efficient on
conventional terms) that both the welfare settlement and the
nationalisations had bureaucratic and alienating features. This
experience and argument, however, is polarised leftwards, not into a
rejection of public ownership in favour of privatisation but into a much
more radical argument that the lack of democracy was not a feature of
socialism but a mark of a continued integration into the purposes of
capitalism (these arguments were expanded usefully by Andrew Cumbers).

The point then of not repeating the postwar, top-down, integrated into
capital’s patterns and structures, becomes the creation of an economy
and social relations that express radically alternative purposes, where
what is best both ethically and in thought of the movement is
generalised across society as a whole. Strikingly, particularly for us,
McDonnell quoted a passage from Raymond Williams’s *The Long
Revolution*, which has been crucial for our understanding both of
Corbynism’s potential and the risks of its incorporation into society’s
existing purposes, for Williams, the organisations of the labour
movement, particularly the Labour Party, the Trade Unions and
Co-operatives rather than developing and embodying alternative purposes
had experienced a moral decline (the argument is therefore significantly
more pessimistic than the argument, above, from *Culture and Society*)
grounded in them coming to be limited to a particularly place in society
whereby, instead of

> The steady offering and discovery of ways of living that could be
> extended to the whole of society, which could quite reasonably be
> organised on the basis of collective democratic institutions and the
> substitution of co-operative equality for competition as the principle
> of social and economic policy...the co-operatives should be simply
> trading organisations, the trade unions simply industrial
> organizations with no other interests, each union committing to its
> own sphere, and the Labour Party simply an alternative government in
> the present system—the country needs an effective
> opposition.[^chapter-8-3]

With only hints both from the actuality of the postwar settlement and
the traditions of radical, decentralised socialism in the UK, the future
is open, as McDonnell argued, “just because the old order is dying, it
doesn’t mean we have an automatic right to remake things”. There are two
vital aspects of this, firstly, we must prove our right to transform
society, we cannot assume it in a top-down way, secondly we must build
both a movement and a set of plans adequate to a social transformation
that cannot be accomplished from above by a narrow elite. As McDonnell
argued, unlike Thatcher, we cannot rely on lavishly funded think tanks,
but we do have a movement, the centrality of the movement in developing
plans is both right and necessary, and again the sense of expanded
expertise, made practically effective by the movement is key. This
process also entails, as McDonnell concluded, that we “lift the spirits
of our people”, this, itself, is vital work to build the confidence and
the capacity to force radical demands on the leadership to allow us to
go beyond a piecemeal defence of what remains of the postwar settlement
(i.e. the most limited possible version of the politics of relief), we
need confidence and daring for the long revolutionary struggle.

Rebecca Long-Bailey
-------------------

McDonnell’s speech was followed with a brief video message from Rebecca
Long Bailey, in which she insisted, importantly, that wealth is created
collectively and the real wealth creators are not capitalists (the
wealth controllers) with ownership and control not reflecting the
collective character of the activity which produces wealth.

Andrew Cumbers
--------------

Andrew Cumbers from Glasgow University then gave an exceptionally useful
talk which overlapped with and developed a number of the themes in
McDonnell’s speech. Cumbers again stressed the necessity of the
collective character of work around alternative models- “a pooling of
collective thoughts”. Significantly, too, Cumbers suggested that this
work was in some ways 40 years too late.

It’s worth trying to unfold here the what doing this work now rather
than forty years ago means. The New Left critique of the postwar
settlement, powerfully developed, for example by Stuart Hall and Hilary
Wainwright in the 1970s and already articulated by Raymond Williams in
the early 1960s was in tense relation to an actually existing social
democracy. Firstly, the New Left critique presupposed certain
achievements of achieved social democracy whilst seeking, on the one
hand, to challenge the racist, sexist, corporatist foundation of these
achievements and the attendant limits on inclusion in those achievements
and aiming at both a deepening and extending and a radical, democratic
break.

Secondly, it’s necessary to contrast the degree of class struggle,
including struggle internal to the working class against a limited,
labour aristocratic definition, keeping the working class in a
subordinate position and enforcing relations of subordination and
exclusion within the working class itself. This struggle, one both about
relations internal to the working class and external, to society as a
whole, to the ruling class, produced assertive tendencies in trade
unions and developments in social movements able to develop capacities
for self-management and develop and empower alternative purposes. The
situation now, after forty years of defeat, limiting the assertiveness
of the working class, destroying non-market forms of ownership and
control and impoverishing large sections of society is significantly
less conducive to the development and empowering of alternative social
purposes and to the movement necessary for a radical programme. Trade
Unions, for example, are far more limited in their scope, accepting of
their allotted social place and capacity to carry through radical
projects of self-management than when Williams applied his critique in
1961. McDonnell’s conclusion on the importance of lifting spirits and
going beyond demands for a mere politics of relief works on the
consequences of these defeats.

Cumbers’s key question was “How do we get to a very different kind of
public ownership- democratic public ownership?” Again, as with
McDonnell, public ownership as state ownership was defended in some
significant aspects with Cumbers presenting rebuttals useful for a
movement that needs to make the case for public ownership across
society. Cumbers noted that the claim private ownership is more
efficient rests on false neoclassical models that presume full
information for consumers and a situation of multiple competing firms,
which is clearly impossible with many of the industries privatised since
1979. Cumbers also noted that many nationalised sectors were more
efficient than foreign or private counterparts and where they faced
problems of underinvestment this was by no means integral to public
ownership, which in fact should make borrowing to invest cheaper than it
is for private firms, but through government choices not to invest. Here
too is the question of “political interference” as a criticism of public
ownership, with Cumbers arguing that what political interference there
was was largely elite interference of this sort and that the more
general worry about “political interference” is an expression of fear at
democratic, popular control instead of market mechanisms and elite
control.

Alongside the rebuttal of arguments against public ownership, Cumbers
made the positive case that both for reasons of efficiency in meeting
needs and principles that there are large areas of life where the logic
of the market should have no place, most notably social care and energy.
Cumbers noted that carbon markets are incapable of delivering on climate
change. This requires public ownership of energy for the necessary
investment and planning. It is perhaps necessary, however, whilst
acknowledging that energy is a crucial sector in causing climate change,
to argue that capitalism in general, across sectors, beyond energy is
destructive of the ecological conditions of life- as [John Bellamy
Foster](https://monthlyreview.org/2011/12/01/capitalism-and-the-accumulation-of-catastrophe/)
puts it,

> The accumulation of capital is at the same time accumulation of
> catastrophe, not only for a majority of the world’s people but living
> species generally. Hence, nothing is *fairer* — more just, more
> beautiful, and more necessary—today than the struggle to overthrow the
> regime of capital and to create a system of substantive equality and
> sustainable human development; a socialism for the twenty-first
> century.

However, again overlapping with McDonnell’s speech, whilst large parts
of the right-wing critique of public ownership are invalid, Cumbers
acknowledged the limitations of the postwar nationalisations: a lack of
public engagement, whether with workers or citizens, the management of
the nationalised firms remaining elite and distant (the point here is
the management was about as elite and distant as the privately owned
equivalents, bureaucratic elitism represents a failure to break with
capitalism not a feature of socialism), a wider failure to embody and
empower alternative values and all these tendencies can be put as a more
general integration of the postwar nationalisations into a project of
capitalist modernisation not a project of building economic democracy
and a qualitatively different society. These limits on the postwar
nationalisations, as Williams argues “in being dragged back to the
processes of the old system, yet at the same time offered as witnesses
of the new,” Britain’s nationalised industries, “so deeply damaged any
alternative principle in the economy as to have emptied British
socialism of any effective meaning”, [^chapter-8-4] are also limitations
rooted in the limits of Labour as a Party and the Trade Unions.
Williams’s argument on the moral decline of the labour movement (a
decline that is rooted in tendencies that had always existed) and their
acceptance of their existing place in society- the Labour Party becoming
mere alternative state administrators and Trade Unions having a narrow,
corporatist and economistic function is key. Cumbers pointed here to
Labour’s perennial suspicion of syndicalist tendencies, though Benn
would be an exception here (and the place of Benn and the Alternative
Economic Strategy and the relation to union hierarchies was developed
later by Wainwright).

By contrast to the limits of the postwar nationalisation, limits which
are precisely not socialist, but limits coming from a failure to break
with capitalism, what’s required is a “revitalised and democratic public
ownership”. Cumbers defined the principles of this as: greater worker,
consumer and citizen participation; the centrality of concern for the
common good not private interests; as much local control as possible;
redistribution; and embodying social and ecological values. As Cumbers
argued these principles would go beyond merely repeating not only the
1945-79 settlement but also Scandinavian social democracy, going beyond
a better incorporation of more of the working class into a better
capitalism.

Cat Hobbs
---------

The introductory session concluded with Cat Hobbs from We Own It. Hobbs
argued that privatisation has always led to reduced accountability and
worse and more expensive services. Hobbs, again mirroring McDonnell on
the power of the movement and circumstances, particularly the collapse
of Carillion, to force arguments onto the agenda, also argued that the
argument had now shifted from whether nationalisation is a good idea to
the practical question of how we do it. Hobbs made the important point,
which again should be confidence building, that renationalisation is
overwhelmingly popular and it’s widely acknowledged that particularly in
the case of natural monopolies privatisation is an impediment to a good
society. Hobbs then provided a litany of failings across private
industries from water companies, noting particularly the environmental
consequences of companies finding it easier and cheaper to pay fines for
polluting than changing their behaviour (it’s important to note here
that capitalism works by always trying to avoid paying its way, and this
is particularly significant with dumping onto nature, what Jason W.
Moore describes as “nature as a sink” [^chapter-8-5]), to railways, the
Royal Mail energy companies, social care providers and buses.

[^chapter-8-1]: *The London Industrial Strategy*, (London, The GLC:
    1985), p. vii.

[^chapter-8-2]: Raymond Williams, *Culture and Society*, (Harmondsworth,
    Pelican: 1958), p. 312.

[^chapter-8-3]: Raymond Williams, *The Long Revolution*, (Harmondsworth,
    Pelican: 1965), pp. 328-9.

[^chapter-8-4]: Williams, *The Long Revolution*, p. 330.

[^chapter-8-5]: Jason W. Moore, *Capitalism in the Web of Life: Ecology
    and the Accumulation of Capital*, (London: Verso, 2015).
