Labour's New Economics Conference: Part Four, Co-Operatives Session
===================================================================

**[Tom Gann](https://twitter.com/Tom_Gann)**

*This is the fourth part of our write-up and analysis of Labour's [New
Economics
Conference](https://labour.org.uk/issues/campaigns/alternative-models-ownership-conference/)
on alternative models of ownership. The "Alternative Models of
Ownership" report is available
[here](https://labour.org.uk/manifesto/manifesto-resources/), and our
analysis of the report
[here](https://newsocialist.org.uk/labours-alternative-models-of-ownership-report/).
This part focuses on the “Doubling the co-op sector: why and how”
breakout session. You can find our recap of the introductory session
[here](/labours-new-economics-conference-part-one-introductory-session/),
the digital breakout session
[here](/labours-new-economics-conference-part-two-digital-session/) and
the housing session
[here](https://newsocialist.org.uk/labours-new-economics-conference-part-three-housing-session/).*

Claire McCarthy, The Co-Operative Party
---------------------------------------

Co-operatives, and the relation between co-operatives and Labour, are
both strongly historically rooted and have potential to address the
current situation and the future. The Co-operative Party has been
Labour’s sister party since 1927, and the first co-op was formed in
Rochdale in 1844 to sell unadulterated food- a working class fightback
in (E. P. Thompson) the “dietary class warfare” of early industrial
capitalism.[^chapter-19-1] At the same time, co-operatives are “at the
heart of Labour’s preparation for government”. The manifesto commits to
doubling the co-op sector, which would, according to McCarthy, amount to
the beginnings of an absolutely necessary “ownership revolution” in the
private sector.

McCarthy then provided a useful, clear account of what is not meant by
doubling the co-op sector. Firstly, success is to be evaluated less in
terms of numbers, more in terms of creating the legal framework and
structures to allow the sector to flourish. This, moreover, is more
significant than mutualising from the centre “at the stroke of a pen”-
although the mutualising of RBS would definitely be desirable. It is
also necessary to distinguish co-ops as part of a real democratisation
of the economy from sham versions, notably the use of mutualisation as
both a vehicle and cover for privatisation, with some shares allocated
to workers without any control over the firm, as in the case of Royal
Mail. With this understanding the Co-operative party have commissioned
work from the New Economics Foundation on legal frameworks and
institutional arrangements to nurture the sector and achieve its
doubling.

Two important new areas for co-ops were discussed. Firstly, in the “new
economy”, particularly co-ops for the self-employed, with examples given
of taxi drivers and supply teachers to bring back solidarity against
isolation. This isolation is double and linked, both a subjective
experience of atomisation and alienation from other workers, and the
objective weakness against capital that these experiences express. Here,
new co-ops would perform some of the functions of agencies in organising
workers and linking them to work. This relates to a more general point,
expanded on by other speakers, on the function of co-ops to integrate
the economy horizontally, with the economy as relations between small
co-ops, rather than hierarchically as in the large, internally manifold,
capitalist firm. The second area, social care, was only mentioned
briefly, though the example of Italian multi-stakeholder co-ops in
social care is discussed in more detail in the “Alternative Models of
Ownership” report.

Rob Jump, University of the West of England
-------------------------------------------

Jump began by saying “we know why we want to double the \[co-operative\]
sector; the question is how”. But do we, in fact, know why? Does this
approach, taking for granted the wholesomeness of co-ops, dissolve
certain foundational questions and in that dissolving miss potential
means, which may be tied to the why? The why, for example, may require
more attention to the needs creating co-operatives are responsive to?
Having said that, whilst there was a risk of a slip into technocracy,
Jump provided a technical account that was clearly useful.

The starting point was that it is clear that without some central
intervention, it will not be possible to double the sector. A
wide-ranging, radical package of measures is required and the emphasis
has to be largely on small co-ops (the vast majority of both private
businesses and co-ops are small). These measures need to address both
creating new co-ops and co-operatising existing small and medium sized
businesses.

Many of the important changes Jump discussed are already in the
“Alternative Models of Ownership” report. Perhaps the two most
significant were, firstly around access to finance, and secondly
procurement. It is precisely those desirable features of co-ops—the
control of workers and other stakeholders, and the centrality of
non-market values— which make banks, who lack the control and shared
values that they would have with privately owned firms, reluctant to
lend. This is a significant barrier to co-ops being able to invest and
expand and is often a spur for their absorption back into the private
sector. With procurement, the work to be done by John Trickett in
rebuilding civil service capacity and the intersection of growing
co-operatives with re-empowering local government, is key.

Ed Mayo, Co-Ops UK
------------------

For Ed Mayo, the key task is one of value (and we could take this
valuing both in an economic and ethical-political sense, and the unity
of these notions is an absolutely central implied theme throughout the
alternative models agenda) and putting people and nature first. Mayo
emphasised that we were at the beginning of the conversation around
co-ops, and how co-ops can contribute to what we might call a revolution
in value. Statements arguing that we are at the beginning of a process
were typical throughout the conference and are both potentially
inspiring- things are open, it’s for us to create the future, and
concerning- is it too late (as with Andrew Cumbers’s worry, the pooling
of knowledge is 40 years too late), are we anywhere near where we need
to be?

The central image in Mayo’s talk, and an image that expresses the
central contradiction around co-ops, was that co-ops are “freshwater
fish in a saltwater pool”- the dominance of capital in the organisation
of the wider economy inhibits their flourishing. As with Rob Jump’s
discussion, this demands a range of interventions to create a situation
that is more supportive of co-ops.

Mayo then offered a set of examples. There was a special emphasis on
agriculture, which was fitting given the origins of the co-operative
movement in a food co-op and the ecological potential of co-operatives
(and of the whole alternative models agenda). Mayo mentioned the recent
role of the Scottish government in supporting farmers’ co-ops and the
very significant numbers of Indian farmer co-ops contributing to a
situation where co-ops support the livelihoods of one in ten people
globally. From a global perspective, the doubling of the co-op sector
is, as Mayo argued, a rather modest ambition if the size of the sector
is compared with, for example, Switzerland, Argentina or Italy,
particularly Emilia Romagna. For Mayo, the example of Emilia Romagna is
particularly valuable for the high levels of equality throughout the
economy coupled with relatively low redistributive taxation (similar
patterns can be found in the Basque country, home of probably the most
succesful co-operative, Mondragon). This suggests a significant role for
an expanded co-op sector in what we could call “hard predistribution”
(in contrast to the version pushed briefly under Ed Miliband’s
leadership), as we argued in [our
study](https://newsocialist.org.uk/labours-alternative-models-of-ownership-report/)
of the Alternative Models of Ownership report,

> In essence, the report returns to the fundamental left recognition,
> going back to Marx, but reanimated in the new left, that we must alter
> (socialise) the underlying economic relationships – i.e. the ownership
> and control of productive capital – in order to produce the outcomes
> we are seeking – equality, investment, community economic stability,
> ecological sustainability – as a matter of course. Considerations of
> the difficulties of sustaining the social democratic state’s capacity
> to redistribute under globalised capitalism have certain parallels
> with the Milibandite notion of “predistribution” and overlap with the
> fact that the tax changes proposed in this Labour manifesto, while
> extremely radical in the current situation, are historically very
> moderate. However, the predistributive measures prescribed by Miliband
> were extremely mild, reliant almost entirely on labour market
> interventions such as education and training to attempt to alter
> distributional outcomes. This report – and the general direction
> offered by Corbyn and McDonnell – is far more robust, pointing to real
> changes to the nature of the ownership and control of productive
> wealth as well as being comfortable with a far greater level of
> redistribution.

Mayo concluded by outlining for steps for an inclusive, sustainable,
democratic economy: commitment to local economic development,
simplification of the corporate framework to make it more suitable for
co-ops, acceleration of investment and tax recognition and support for
worker buyouts. As the Alternative Models of Ownership report argues,
this last step will be particularly important, given the impending
“silver tsunami” of retirements of baby boomer business owners creating
both an opening for worker buyouts and the possibility of seeing large
numbers of small and medium sized businesses close.

Challenges
----------

There remain, however, a number of challenges and limits to both a
co-operative agenda in general and to the particular version outlined
here, and many of these can be read through Mayo’s fish image. Firstly,
from a broadly technical perspective, are the proposals in the manifesto
and alternative models report sufficient? [John Marlow has argued for
us](https://newsocialist.org.uk/a-socialist-bank-labours/) that as they
stand Labour’s National Investment Bank proposals are insufficient to
sustaining the kinds of radical social transformation, including in
supporting co-ops, that are required.

The next questions are tactical and strategic in nature, and perhaps
mark a point where parts of the co-operative agenda may have outlived
their usefulness. The cases of both social care co-ops and co-ops in the
gig economy are useful examples here. Under a New Labour government
which rejected renationalisation or wider economic reforms, or even
under the coalition government with its ostensible commitment to “The
Big Society”, demands to support and expand co-operatives were a
tactically sound means of obtaining some relief and pushing a for
islands of anti-capitalist values within capitalism. Equally, under
current conditions, even if the May government makes far fewer gestures
towards the sectors, the relief obtained through establishing co-ops in
the gig economy is a valuable improvisation in difficult circumstances.
However, if we are considering a preparations for a Labour government,
which will have considerable capacity for exercising state power, the
question remains whether co-ops are always the best solution. In a
choice between the current situation with social care and
co-operatives—perhaps following the Italian model—it is clear what is
preferrable. Even here, though, there may be forms of or close to
co-operatives that risk imposing additional burdens on care workers (the
point was made during the session that workers in co-operatives tend to
work harder, which may not always be desirable from a pro-workers
perspective). At the very least, then, it is necessary to be precise
about what kind of co-ops we are aiming for, with [Carl
Rowlands](https://party.coop/2011/08/02/arguments-for-guild-socialism-in-the-care-sector/)
contrasting co-production with a “guild socialist” model able to develop
skills, enhance workers’ positions and demand proper resourcing.
Moreover, an incoming radical Labour government may also be able to
fully integrate social care into forms of national ownership whilst
creating forms of democratic control, which may be more compatible with
Rowlands’s model. Equally, whilst the relief offered by co-ops in the
currently under-regulated gig economy is valuable, an incoming Labour
government may be able to address forms of exploitation in the gig
economy more radically. There is nothing virtuous in relying on forms of
resilience and bottom-up effort to make horrible situations marginally
more bearable when the situations themselves could be transformed.

Then, there area set of problems of a less technical nature that emerge
from how co-operatives are “still subject to the capitalist law of
value”, as we put it in our analysis of the report, and appeals based on
the wholesomeness of co-operatives cannot dissolve the problems and
contradictions that result from this. The point could be expressed as
how to go beyond “socialism in one company”, and as we argued in our
analysis, the worker-owners of the very successful and internally deeply
egalitarian US plywood co-operatives were often deeply conservative in
their wider political behaviour. In Raymond Williams’s words, the
question is how to go beyond co-operatives as “simply trading
organisations” isolated from any struggle for alternative social
purposes.[^chapter-19-2]

The question can also be about the line between internal co-op relations
and external ones, particularly when it comes to non-member workers
employed (that is, in the last instance exploited) by the co-op’s
worker-owners. The point was made that often the employment of
non-members, particularly in a recession, is more secure than in private
firms. This is certainly not to be sniffed at, but neither is it
equivalent to a radical social transformation. In some cases, moreover,
this can map onto and be intensified by the international division of
labour, particularly through market pressures on larger co-ops. The case
of Mondragon setting up a subsidiary manufacturing plant in Brazil,
which Erik Olin Wright describes as being “run pretty much like a
conventional capitalist firm” is instructive here:

> The leadership of MCC believes that, given market pressures linked to
> globalization, this strategy of national and global expansion is
> necessary for the survival of the Mondragón cooperatives in the 21st
> century. Whether or not this diagnosis is correct is a matter of
> considerable controversy, but in any case the result of this expansion
> is to intensify the capitalist dimension of the Mondragón economic
> hybrid \[and the non-inclusion of many workers in the co-operative
> produces\] a global configuration of economic and class relations
> within the conglomerate structure of the Mondragón cooperatives
> \[which\] is in deep tension with its cooperativist
> principles.[^chapter-19-3]

A further question where the impact of the global division of labour is
significant may be found in the realm of tech co-ops. If tech companies
exist near the top of global value chains, where more wealth is captured
than really created, wouldn’t a tech co-op merely share the spoils of
imperialism among a slightly wider group of people than private
appropriation? This question relates to the point of tension that [David
Quentin
identified](https://newsocialist.org.uk/seventy-seven-nation-industrial-reserve-army/)
between a radical and social democratic left within Corbynism over
Britain’s neocolonial position within the capitalist world order.

In responses to questions, it was argued that co-ops could spread
through serving as good examples, practical proof that a socialist ethos
works. However, whilst this claim is not entirely without merit, it
miscasts the role of the ethical. This overestimation of the power of
ethical contagion in spreading an internally socialist organisation over
wider society ignores the context where co-operatives are subject to
market pressures and, in many cases, the worker-owners may benefit
significantly from the wider national and international organisation of
capitalism in such a way that they become integrated into capitalism as
a whole. Far too much is being staked on technical, legal measures and
ethical contagion. Indeed, one audience member raised the issue of the
sustainability and limited socialist implications of the major expansion
of South Korean co-operatives in a context where there was no real
challenge to neoliberal values.

To return to Raymond Williams, the ethical needs to operate differently
when it comes to co-ops. The ethical totality is not a network of
islands of co-operation within capitalism but with the wider movement
and its struggles against capitalism into which co-operatives are
integrated, whether this is presented as the institutionalised culture
of the working class, its “remarkable creative
achievement”[^chapter-19-4] (Williams) or “[the world of
labour](https://newleftreview.org/I/150/ralph-miliband-the-new-revisionism-in-britain)”
(Ralph Miliband) or if we’re to take something more specific and
hopefully beginning to be emergent today, “[Corbynism from
Below](https://newsocialist.org.uk/corbynism-from-below/)” (Tom
Blackburn). To return to the example of Emilia Romagna, the density of
co-operatives—whilst sustained, to some extent, by a useful legal
structure—is far more an emanation from the wider world of Italian
Communism, of its capacity to build deeply rooted institutions. To take
one more example, the feminist and particularly socialist feminist
struggles of the 1970s and 1980s produced a range of self-help
institutions through which women, especially working class women, met
their needs directly and came to make demands on government for
resourcing.

Here Silvia Federici’s opposition between the movement rooted, popular
power embodied in creating autonomous institutions to meet needs and on
the basis of extended popular power making demands on the state for
resourcing and top-down state services, alien to the lives of working
class women provides a superior model for what co-operatives could look
like to the simple trading organisations nurtured by an improved legal
framework that many of the discussions at the session risked sliding
into.

> It is one thing to set up a day care center the way we want it, and
> then demand that the State pay for it. It is quite another thing to
> deliver our children to the State to control them not for five but for
> fifteen hours a day…In one case we regain some control over our lives,
> in the other we extend the State’s control over us.[^chapter-19-5]

Within these socialist feminist struggles prefiguration (a theme already
present in Raymond Williams) becomes central. In extending principles of
co-operation, of meeting our needs and extending our capacities in
common against the state and capital (this necessarily antagonistic
relation between popular power and needs and capital tends to be wished
away by appeals to the wholesomeness of co-ops), the task is less of
developing legal frameworks for when we come to power, although there is
a place for this, but one of building a movement within which popular
capacities to satisfy needs that capital cannot and will not meet can be
nurtured and developed.

[^chapter-19-1]: E. P. Thompson, The Making of the English Working Class
    (London: Pelican, 1968), p. 315

[^chapter-19-2]: Raymond Williams, The Long Revolution, (Harmondsworth,
    Pelican: 1965), pp. 328-9.

[^chapter-19-3]: Erik Olin Wright, Envisioning Real Utopias, (London,
    Verso, 2010), pp. 170-3.

[^chapter-19-4]: Raymond Williams, Culture and Society, (Harmondsworth,
    Pelican 1958), pp. 312-4.

[^chapter-19-5]: Silvia Federici, Revolution at Point Zero: Housework,
    Reproduction and Feminist Struggle, Oakland, PM Press, p. 21
