New Economics Conference: Digital Session
=========================================

**[Wendy Liu](https://twitter.com/dellsystem)**

It can be frustrating to read the mainstream discourse on the challenges
posed by technology platforms. It feels like we’re finally at a point
where everyone recognises that tech companies are [not unambiguously
good](https://www.wired.com/story/the-other-tech-bubble/), no matter how
much they talk about making the world a better place. On the other hand,
there’s often very little proposed in the way of actual *solutions*. The
most common narrative seems to consist primarily of hand-wringing,
coupled with the same tired lines about a little more regulation or
breaking up monopolies. There’s a distinct lack of imagination here, an
inability to see beyond the horizons of neoliberalism, which makes it
difficult for many to envision how technology could function outside of
the current economic paradigm.

In that context, it was refreshing to attend this breakout session,
where all the panelists seemed quite willing to rethink deeply ingrained
assumptions about how technology should work and—more to the point—how
it should be owned. Given the pace of technological development, and its
potential implications for the battle between capital and labour,
ownership of technology may become the key economic question of our
time. This session showed that Labour is prepared to tackle that
question, and was a major step up from the strategy set out by the
Shadow Digital Minister [in
December](https://newsocialist.org.uk/labours-digital-strategy/).

This session was moderated by Chi Onwurah, Labour MP for Newcastle upon
Tyne Central since 2010 and Shadow Minister for Industrial Strategy,
Science and Innovation since 2016. Onwurah began with a personal
backstory: she’s been a network engineer for two decades, and what
motivated her upon that career path was the intention of using
technology to make the world a better place. Now, though, Onwurah sees
technology as part of the problem; networks *can* distribute power,
sure, but they can also centralise it, and in recent years we’ve only
seen the latter. Whatever freedom technology once represented,
especially in the form of the Internet, it’s now clear that the freedom
it brings is primarily one-sided: freedom for its owners, but not for
its end users.

Onwurah sees this as the result of two separate but entwined factors.
The first comes down to a stunning lack of diversity within the tech
industry—those in positions of power are overwhelmingly wealthy, white,
and male, and as a result less likely to challenge or even notice the
prevailing power structures from which they've benefitted. The second
has to do with the fact that so much recent technological development
occurred during a time of neoliberal consensus, when it felt only
natural that the fruits of government-funded advances in technology
would be [appropriated by the private
sector](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/03/socialism-innovation-capitalism-smith).

As the narrative around neoliberalism [continues to
crumble](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/31/witnessing-death-neoliberalism-imf-economists),
we’ll have to ensure that the discourse around technology changes with
it. Most importantly, that means rethinking who should own and control
the technology upon which we’ve all become so reliant. Some analogies to
the welfare state could be useful here—Onwurah suggested that we could
reconceptualise cloud computing as social housing for the digital age,
whereby digital resources are provided as a free public good for those
who need it. Such a proposal would have the welcome side effect of
weakening the market power of commercial players—Amazon, for instance,
owes [the majority of its
profits](https://www.marketwatch.com/story/amazon-is-worth-so-much-because-aws-is-techs-true-unicorn-2017-04-27)
to Amazon Web Services, its cloud computing arm.

Michael Jacobs on automation
----------------------------

First to speak was [Michael Jacobs](https://twitter.com/michaelujacobs),
director of IPPR’s Commission on Economic Justice and former advisor to
Gordon Brown. Most of his talk centred around the challenges presented
by automation, in line with a
[report](https://www.ippr.org/research/publications/managing-automation)
that IPPR released in December. Jacobs stressed that we shouldn’t think
of automation as something dramatically new that has never been
experienced before; after all, automation has a [long
history](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2013/04/the-rise-of-the-machines),
which was chronicled even in Marx’s time. What Jacobs pinpointed as new
to *our* era—what some call [the second machine
age](https://www.lrb.co.uk/v37/n05/john-lanchester/the-robots-are-coming)—is
that it’s not just routinised manual labour that’s being automated away,
but also cognitive labour, once thought the preserve of humans. What
we’re experiencing now is a qualitatively different *type* of
automation, and it’s happening on a different scale than has ever
happened before.

Mainstream discourse around automation tends to frame it as [a
threat](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jun/26/jobs-future-automation-robots-skills-creative-health),
posing a “risk” to particular professions or even jobs in general. It's
a very pessimistic outlook, but it makes sense; when we’ve organised our
entire economy around the idea that most people should be working, it’s
hard not to see automation in a negative light. Although the longer-term
potential of automation includes [reducing the primacy of
work](https://www.theguardian.com/news/2018/jan/19/post-work-the-radical-idea-of-a-world-without-jobs)
(and especially unpleasant work), such a dramatic reorganisation of the
economy will not happen overnight, and in the meantime we must address
the challenges in the short term.

For Jacobs, that means counteracting automation's tendency to shift the
balance of power away from labour. Beyond directly replacing workers,
automation will result in more labour becoming substituted by capital,
meaning that returns to capital will result in ever-greater wealth
concentration. This is familiar ground for anyone who’s heard much about
Thomas Piketty’s Capital in the Twenty-First Century, and Jacobs
suggests that if we wish to avoid the increase in inequality that will
ensue, we need to counter that shift.

One such strategy would be to embolden labour, by empowering trade
unions to manage the challenges posed by automation. In recent years,
we’ve seen a hollowing-out of the middle classes as many highly-educated
workers (previously considered “skilled”) are now considered
“unskilled”, whereas those lucky enough to take advantage of
technological change are [paid more than
ever](http://www.notesfrombelow.org/article/silicon-inquiry#the-rank-and-file).
Unions could play a crucial role in linking high- and low-wage work, by
consolidating bargaining power between the two and thus ensuring that
the benefits of automation are shared equally among workers, instead of
being used to foster divisions. An ancillary option, which Jacobs
mentioned briefly, is to ensure that labour owns more capital, for
example via sovereign wealth funds (discussed at more length in the IPPR
report).

Jacobs ended with some thoughts on tech platforms. He reminded us that
we're living in an era when companies like Apple and Facebook have more
market dominance—and the ensuring cultural, social, and political power
that comes with it—than any corporation or possibly even nation state
has ever had before. These corporations acquired this power primarily
through their hold on our data, which they’ve [hoovered up and
monetised](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2018/jan/28/morozov-artificial-intelligence-data-technology-online)
in ways that we often don’t even know about.

Jacobs didn’t explicitly frame the problem in terms of enclosure of [the
commons of the digital
age](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2016/02/free-software-movement-richard-stallman-linux-open-source-enclosure/),
but the concept feels like an apt description of what he outlined. The
fact that all these unaccountable corporations have been allowed to keep
their hold on our data, purely in exchange for providing some services,
may be one of the greatest economic tragedies of our time, one that most
of us are only just starting to realise. Perhaps it’s now time to
reclaim this digital commons, bit by bit.

Nick Srnicek on platform capitalism
-----------------------------------

Next to speak was [Nick Srnicek](https://twitter.com/n_srnck), lecturer
in Digital Economy at King’s College London and author of Platform
Capitalism. Srnicek’s talk focused on technology platforms and the
technical architectural features that lead them toward monopoly. He
defined a platform as an intermediary between multiple (not necessarily
just two) types of users—for example, Facebook provides an interface
between advertisers, app developers, publishers, brands, and consumers,
among others. The reason so many new technology platforms are natural
monopolies comes down to three main factors: network effects (the more
users a platform has, the more useful it becomes); competitive
advantages resulting from data extraction; and path dependency as other
services come to depend on the original platform.

Srnicek proposed that these monopolistic tendencies are severe enough
that we should not count on either [regulation or
competition](/monopolys-fallacy/) as a means of settling the problem.
The traditional response to natural monopolies, as Srnicek [has
written](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/aug/30/nationalise-google-facebook-amazon-data-monopoly-platform-public-interest),
is nationalisation, in order to take these services into public
ownership. It’s not a major leap to see that such a solution could still
be relevant for the digital age.

Of course, things won’t necessarily be as simple as that: these
platforms are global in scope, and their assets are primarily intangible
in nature, which means they lack the geographic fixity that made
railways or electricity providers so prone to nationalisation. Srnicek
acknowledged that the exact details of how one would nationalise an
explicitly transnational technology corporation remains an open
question. Still, he noted, absent any larger framework of close
international cooperation, our next best option is to use the national
solutions in our toolbox. A government willing to ban access to, say,
Uber or Amazon domestically has enough bargaining power to drastically
change the economic landscape, whether it’s by promoting a domestic (and
ideally public) alternative or by enforcing stricter regulation in line
with democratic aims. Concerns about the possibility of bolstering the
surveillance state could be assuaged; Srnicek suggested that similar
concerns were raised with Royal Mail, and it’s just a matter of creating
the right legal and technical framework to make privacy a non-issue.

Srnicek ended by proposing some specific, smaller-scale solutions that
could nevertheless have significant impact on the technological terrain,
both in terms of providing useful services and as a means of checking
the power of unaccountable corporations. The first was to nationalise
mobility—TfL, for example, could become more of a platform, and if Uber
wanted to be part of it, it would have to be subject to TfL’s
regulations regarding worker pay and conditions. The second was to
nationalise cloud computing, in line with Onwurah’s earlier comment
about the social housing equivalent of Amazon Web Services. The last was
for more co-operative platforms: Twitter, for example, could be
[democratically run and
owned](https://www.ft.com/content/5997d76e-ede3-11e6-ba01-119a44939bb6).

Francesca Bria on the smart city
--------------------------------

The last speaker was [Francesca
Bria](https://twitter.com/francesca_bria), Digital Commissioner for
Barcelona City Council. Bria’s talk focused on the idea of the smart
city, characterising it as an important battleground for addressing the
question of technology ownership on a smaller scale. At a time when
cities are voluntarily giving up their sovereignty to technology
corporations—witness [Alphabet’s planned takeover of
Toronto](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2018/feb/05/the-guardian-view-on-google-and-toronto-smart-city-dumb-deal),
or [Amazon’s Hunger Games-like
search](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2018/02/amazon-corporate-headquarters-tax-breaks)
for its new campus—Bria’s call for a municipal digital revolution
concurrently with a *democratic* revolution offers an alternative
perspective, and one that’s sorely needed. The main thrust of her talk
is that we should be [rethinking the concept of the “smart
city”](http://www.rosalux-nyc.org/rethinking-the-smart-city/) from the
ground up, in order to ensure that technology is controlled by
democratic means and not technocratic fiat.

This means expanding our understanding of a “smart city” beyond the
confines of what’s normally within the remit of municipal governments,
by examining the wider context of technological development in recent
years. Bria mentioned the recent rise of self-service checkouts, which
masquerade as an enhancement for the sake of efficiency but whose more
important function is to outsource jobs to the consumer so that the
retailer can save on labour costs. This sort of technological advance
highlights how the deployment of technology often follows existing
economic trends; when it comes to the dominant economic paradigm,
technology companies are typically
[unrevolutionary](https://www.ft.com/content/92c3021c-34c2-11e3-8148-00144feab7de),
instead advancing [neoliberal
principles](https://newsocialist.org.uk/the-gig-economy/). Bria
criticised the rising
“[Uberisation](https://www.ft.com/content/32b65706-ce16-11e7-9dbb-291a884dd8c6)”
of the economy, whereby corporations increasingly outsource
responsibility to workers, the result of which is increased
precaritisation.

As Onwurah said at the beginning of the session, networks can distribute
power, or they can centralise it. The growing importance of the Internet
has resulted in a truly unprecedented concentration of wealth among a
small number of companies. Bria noted that the world’s [most valuable
public
companies](https://www.cnbc.com/2017/10/27/amazon-alphabet-microsoft-facebook-apple-added-181b-to-value.html)
were, at the end of 2017, Apple, Alphabet, Microsoft, Amazon and
Facebook—all technology companies, and all headquartered in either
California or Washington state. Their reticence to pay tax is, by now,
[fairly
well-known](https://www.ft.com/content/40e058b6-cf94-11e7-b781-794ce08b24dc),
but what’s possibly more worrying is that these companies are behaving
[like financial
institutions](https://www.ft.com/content/0ee3bef8-0d87-11e8-8eb7-42f857ea9f09),
controlling investment flows on the basis of their enormous wealth.

Bria reminded us that much of this wealth is predicated on rent
extraction on the basis of our data, and mentioned Shoshana Zuboff’s
term “[surveillance
capitalism](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1057%2Fjit.2015.5)”
which neatly captures the extent to which data extraction has become the
new economic model for the digital age. Bria suggested that the question
of who owns this data could determine the future, to paraphrase [Angela
Merkel at
Davos](http://www.independent.co.uk/news/business/analysis-and-features/angela-merkel-davos-2018-speech-trump-what-did-she-say-germany-a8176021.html)
earlier this year. In other words, the current situation is not
necessarily inescapable; it could be addressed with the requisite
political will.

Bria then sketched out some solutions, including invoking antitrust law;
taxing income flows; and changing our broader economic priorities so
that we move beyond advertising-funded models for critical digital
infrastructure. On a municipal level, specific platforms like Uber and
Airbnb could be prevented from operating in certain markets, which has
[already been
happening](http://www.independent.co.uk/travel/news-and-advice/uber-ban-countries-where-world-taxi-app-europe-taxi-us-states-china-asia-legal-a7707436.html).
On the other hand, attempts by governments to reclaim sovereignty will
not be unchallenged; Bria suggested that we could see the rise of
digital trade wars, in which the WTO would be deployed to tackle what it
sees as "digital protectionism".

Bria concluded by discussing the concept of
"[remunicipality](http://ajuntament.barcelona.cat/lafabricadelsol/en/content/remunicipality-water-0)",
whereby municipal-level services that were previously privatised could
be taken back into public ownership. Such a concept wouldn't just apply
to services like electricity or water; it could equally apply to data.
The city of Barcelona already mandates public sovereignty of data within
its procurement contracts, with the goal of reclaiming the data commons
and using that as a foundation on which to build public infrastructure.
Bria mentioned the possibility of using blockchain technology for
allowing [decentralised data
ownership](http://dataconomy.com/2018/01/blockchain-data-storage-decentralized-future/).

Audience questions
------------------

The first question revolved around who, specifically, should own data.
Srnicek stressed the importance of collective data ownership, as an
alternative to the status quo of data being owned by private
corporations as well as the possibility of individual ownership
resulting in personal data markets. Jacobs suggested that data could be
owned at multiple levels, and be conceived of as a commons at all
levels. Bria agreed with the idea of collective ownership, adding that
encryption could be important for preserving privacy.

Another question addressed the [technical skills
gap](https://www.technologyreview.com/s/608707/the-myth-of-the-skills-gap/),
and whether teaching people how to use and manipulate these systems
could result in democratic empowerment or control. Jacobs' response was
to concur that we need more technologically-trained people, but
suggested that it wouldn't be enough, since these systems are designed
to be [black
boxes](https://newrepublic.com/article/120987/pasquales-black-box-challenges-digital-sphere-run-algorithms)
where not even the designers are necessarily fully aware of how they
work. Srnicek countered with an alternative perspective: we should
instead be prioritising training people to do care work, as those are
the jobs that will be more necessary in the future. Srnicek's conclusion
is an uncommon one, given the prevailing narrative that we need to
[teach more kids to
code](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/nov/20/future-digital-children-analogue-betraying-generation-michael-gove),
but one that's difficult to dispute given everything else that was said
during this session—the high wages in the technology sector are more
accurately seen as the result of monopoly rent extraction, rather than
an indicator that the industry is building products that address social
needs. In that light, attempting to push more people into the technology
industry may not be the most productive use of resources; it's quite
possible that there are already enough software engineers, but their
talents just need to be redirected towards more socially valuable
outlets.

There was a thought-provoking question about the trade-off between
identity and privacy, asked by a former employee of Royal Mail who had
been tasked to implement a digital postbox system (which never came to
fruition). Bria highlighted the possibility of technical solutions to
the problem of preserving privacy while verifying identity, through the
use of cryptography to accomplish decentralised identity management.
Srnicek added that this problem is especially important in the realm of
financial transactions, as such data is currently processed by private
corporations, and suggested that we need a public payments platform.
Though Srnicek didn't go into detail about how that would work, what
he's suggesting could easily be an expansion of an existing project by
the Government Digital Service called [GOV.UK
Pay](https://www.payments.service.gov.uk/). Currently, the service is
limited in scope to niche functions like buying a fishing license or
sending money to prisoners, but there's no technical reason its remit
couldn't be expanded; it's simply a matter of changing government
policy.

Conclusion
----------

This session was an exciting and thoughtful discussion of the economic
challenges facing a potential left-wing government in the digital age.
The underlying thread was a recognition that technology companies have
become too large and too powerful to be left unchecked, and that we
can't simply rely on the market to fix things; the time for a
laissez-faire approach is long gone. If we wish to ensure that the
fruits of technological development are collectively shared and
democratically controlled, then some sort of government action is
necessary.

The next challenge, then, is to understand what specifically needs to be
done. There are open questions around method and timeline—is it better
to focus on incremental change, or to concentrate on specific actions?
Furthermore, how can we rebuild the institutions of the public sector
and ensure we have skilled people in key positions?

The answers are as yet unclear, but this session was a sign that Labour
is asking the right questions, and an indication that it will be
prepared for the technological challenges ahead once it gets into
government.
