Seventy-Seven Nation Industrial Reserve Army
============================================

**[David Quentin](https://twitter.com/_DavidQuentin)**

The story told by the "Paradise Papers" is ultimately about the core
structural fault-line in capitalism between capital and labour. That
fault-line has sheared a great distance because the relations in
practice are extremely complex, with hyper-exploited labour and
tax-privileged capital operating in different jurisdictions and
connected only through global value chains. This article considers (1)
the nature of "offshore", (2) the global context of labour exploitation,
(3) the structural relation between the two, and (4) the policy
challenges that these issues might present to a future social democrat
in No 10.

(1) From the Queen of England to the Hounds of Hell
---------------------------------------------------

2016's "Panama Papers" offshore data leak seemed to implicate none other
than then-Prime Minister David Cameron (or at least his family's wealth)
in some dodgy-looking offshore business, which set the bar pretty high
for any leak which might follow. 2017's "Paradise Papers" leak
delivered, however, managing to implicate the actual Queen. And so The
Establishment stands accused of endemic corruption, having seemingly
been caught red-handed twice in a row.

The liberal defence of the status quo in these contexts is invariably
that while the offshore system *can* be used for tax evasion and money
laundering, the purposes to which it is put are predominantly lawful;
there are (so the mantra goes) perfectly "legitimate" reasons to be
offshore. And there is a some truth to this proposition, particularly as
regards the Paradise Papers, which were a leak from a significantly
classier outfit than the firm from which the Panama Papers originated.
It is not, however, the defence that those who advance it think it is.

Indeed, it is in the very nature of "offshore" that, rather than being a
place outside the jurisdiction of "onshore" as one might imagine, it is
a legal space deliberately and carefully constructed out of
interpenetrating legal regimes. So, for example, the reason that a hedge
fund can be in the Cayman Islands for the purposes of the UK's tax
regime, and therefore escape UK tax, even though its activities are
controlled by managers in London, is because of a specific exemption
from UK tax for precisely this kind of situation -- the [Investment
Manager
Exemption](https://www.gov.uk/guidance/uk-tax-on-investment-managers-and-non-resident-investors#history).

Why does the UK carve out this "offshore" space for funds which are
managed here? It is because the UK wants to support the City's role as a
global financial services centre. If people from the rest of the world
risk having to pay UK tax by virtue of investing in a fund managed from
London, they will not invest. So the UK taxes the income and gains of
UK-resident investors (like, say, the Queen), but it makes sure that the
fund itself is safe from the UK's own taxes on accumulation by means of
an express exemption. In other words, the UK uses the Cayman Islands
(and similar jurisdictions) to create a tax-free space for rich people
from everywhere else in the world to place their assets under UK-based
management.

This may seem perfectly reasonable to UK elites, mindful as they are of
the competitive global market for the financial services which are so
disproportionately crucial to our economy, but it has the effect of
creating a global space where capital can accumulate untaxed. There
really is very little reassurance for anyone concerned about equality in
the fact that this space is a "legal" one, or the fact that the Queen is
compliant with her UK tax obligations in respect of it. The reality is
that capital will always want to accumulate untaxed if it can, and it
can find any number of ways of getting into such spaces while leaving no
trace of itself behind in the legal spaces where tax *is* charged on
accumulation.

The UK does not care one jot whether a non-UK-resident investor is
paying their non-UK taxes in respect of their participation in a
UK-managed offshore fund. So far as the UK is concerned, it may as well
be the world's most corrupt oligarchs and kleptocrats participating in
that hedge fund alongside the Queen. Indeed, it is better for the UK if
that is what they are -- all the more accumulation in the fund, and
therefore all the more remuneration for those UK-resident managers on
whom the UK *does* charge tax.

To be clear, the Investment Manager Exemption is just one of a number of
features of the UK tax code which reveal "offshore" to be constituted in
part by a deliberate imposition of tax-free (or tax-reduced)
accumulation on the rest of the world by the UK. A more obviously
abusive and consequently somewhat notorious example is the [Finance
Company Partial
Exemption](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/international-manual/intm218600).
This is a special low rate of tax which applies where a tax haven
subsidiary of a UK company is deployed as a finance hub, extracting
tax-deductible payments of interest from group companies in other
jurisdictions. The UK could perfectly well police the use of tax haven
finance hubs to fleece other countries by imposing a full rate of tax in
these circumstances. Instead it effectively takes a cut of the tax which
has been avoided elsewhere.

To zoom out a further step, the UK is very far from alone in maintaining
these "legal" offshore spaces. Most major economies are at it in one way
or another. The USA is particularly at fault in this regard, having
created the tax environment in which it was possible for the US-based
tech giants to accumulate their vast offshore fortunes. Less often
mentioned is the Netherlands, which is among the very worst offenders,
carving out a tax-advantaged conduit space for unbelievable volumes of
corporate intellectual property money.

The picture that emerges from these "legitimate" reasons to be offshore,
when one unpacks them, is therefore one of wealth flowing from all over
the world -- out of real places where people live, work and consume --
and into offshore legal spaces that have been constructed by wealthy
jurisdictions for the purposes of tax-free or tax-reduced accumulation
of capital.

So much for capital, for the time being. The question I want to address
in the next two sections of this article is where that leaves labour.

(2) Everyone knows about it
---------------------------

It is a truism of tax justice that, where accumulation of capital goes
untaxed (or undertaxed), it is those without wealth who have to pick up
the fiscal slack by way of an increased burden of taxation on labour and
consumption. What I want to do in this article, however, is think about
that dynamic as it takes effect *globally*, in a world of
hyper-exploitation of labour at the remote ends of global value chains;
remote, that is, from those swollen sacs of undertaxed capital
accumulating in deliberately constructed offshore spaces. This requires
us to consider (in this section) the mechanisms of rent-extraction along
global value chains, and (in the following section) a global tax norm
called the "arm's length" principle.

Starting, then, with rent-extraction along global value chains, this is
not a malignant phenomenon on the periphery of an otherwise benign
system; rent-extraction is what global value chains are *for*. If your
business is big enough or possesses the appropriate kind of (generally
intangible) asset, you can park that business on a choke-point somewhere
on the winding route from raw materials to consumption, and maximise the
value you extract from the chain in the form of profit, at the expense
of the other firms operating along it.

The way this works in practice is unbounded in its variety. There are a
few well known instances -- the sportswear manufacturers and the tech
manufacturers which do not actually do any manufacturing, the giant
multinational which monopolises online retail, the search and social
media behemoths which are fast becoming the only places where it is
worthwhile advertising -- but really the dynamic is endemic. And it
affects everything that people in rich countries buy.

Yes, the things we buy are cheap because of cheap hyper-exploited labour
abroad, we all know that, but the cheapness of that labour does not
necessarily mean greater profits for the company actually employing the
cheap labour. It is much more likely to mean greater profits for
whichever "lead firm" (to use the global value chains jargon) is
"governing" the value chain. Being a lead firm in a global value chain
generally means outsourcing the business of exploiting labour to other
firms in the chain, and making excess profits by using its governing
position in the chain to force those other firms' prices down. That then
further compels those other firms to increase their levels of
exploitation of labour.

Perhaps the best known example of this is the garment value chain.
Garment brand owners and garment retailers do not manufacture garments;
garments are manufactured by independent and relatively small firms who
use extremely cheap labour in low-income countries. The brand owners and
retailers, sitting on a choke-point between those firms and their
worldwide markets, can switch suppliers very easily, and they are
therefore in a dominant position as regards setting prices. This is the
dynamic that keeps workers in garment-producing countries in such
notoriously bad and high-risk conditions, even while the profits of
garment firms that don't even actually make garments remain high.

And underpinning the existence of those hyper-exploited workers at the
further reaches of global value chains in any number of sectors are (1)
gendered and racialised systems of violence and oppression, and (2) the
global "industrial reserve army" whose lives are truly desperate: the
further hundreds of millions without access even to basic sanitation or
essential health services.

Pausing at this stage to consider some tax consequences of this dynamic
of rent-extraction from global value chains, what it means is that where
a company in a low-income country "articulates" with a global value
chain, both the tax take from labour and the tax take from corporate
profits are suppressed. The resources available to protect the workers
from risk, regulate the employer, collect taxes, expand the economy
through public investment &c are therefore constrained by
rent-extraction going on *in another jurisdiction*. And that fiscal
constraint has a feedback effect; the workers in a jurisdiction which is
impacted by it are more readily available for hyper-exploitation.

(3) Far from this postoperaismo for evermore
--------------------------------------------

But the dynamic of rent-extraction along global value chains has another
less visible tax impact, which will take some further explaining. It
relates to the value of business inputs. One impact of the global value
chain dynamic is that the tools of rent-extraction (for example
intellectual property) are extremely valuable business assets, and this
must necessarily have the consequence that genuinely value-bearing
inputs are commensurately underpriced.

I am referring here to freely negotiated business-to-business prices
between independent market actors where the seller is not a "lead firm"
-- all such prices reflect the fact that, for commodities to make it
from raw materials to consumption, rent-extracting capital is going to
swallow up an unearned share of the value produced along the way. To
illustrate by reference to the garment value chain, wholesale garments
change hands on the open market at a price which reflects the dynamic
whereby (i) manufacturers are compelled to use hyper-exploited labour
because (ii) only "lead firms" who have made substantial investments in
their brand or retail positioning can profit significantly from selling
them. Too cheaply, in other words.

This is where the matter of the arm's length principle comes in. The
arm's length principle is the principle whereby sibling companies in a
multinational group are treated for tax purposes as having entered into
transactions with each other at "arm's length" prices. In other words
(broadly speaking) the prices that the intra-group goods or services are
treated as fetching are those they would fetch in the open market.

The idea is to achieve a fair distribution of taxable receipts and
deductible expenses between the jurisdictions where the group is
operating, but, as we have seen, the open market suppresses the price of
genuinely value-bearing inputs. This means that in jurisdictions where
such inputs are produced, even if the rules are being complied with, a
suppressed receipt will be booked for tax purposes, and in other
jurisdictions a commensurately-enhanced share of the group's profits
will be booked.

The adverse global tax impact of rent-extraction along global value
chains (*i.e.* in particular the suppression of fiscal resources in low
income countries where hyper-exploited labour is performed) is
consequently reproduced *within* multinational firms, even in
circumstances where the now notoriously unfit-for-purpose global
corporate tax system is working exactly as it should.

Of course, the suppression of fiscal resources in low-income countries
by reference to rent-extraction along global value chains and within
lead firms, with its consequent feedback loop with regard to the
hyper-exploitation of labour, does *not* lead to huge commensurate
fiscal windfalls in the rich countries where capital is owned. As we saw
in section one of this article, capital is positively encouraged by rich
countries to accumulate tax free.

When we think of offshore wealth from the standpoint of the left in a
rich country like the UK, particularly if the wealth in question is
owned by a UK resident such as the Queen, or by a company which does
business in the UK, we tend to suppose that it belongs onshore here in
the UK. A key point I want to make in this article is that (as explained
above) the huge bundles of assets sitting offshore with their
"legitimate reasons" for being there did not apparate by magic -- they
are there because of the systematic immiseration of workers worldwide
and the global industrial reserve army.

A consoling value-theoretical fantasy currently popular in some left
circles is that we create value for capital by dint of, for example, our
unpaid immaterial labour building the vast databases of our own
commodity preferences that are held by social media giants. While this
may be politically expedient from the point of view of persuading people
in rich countries that surplus value is being extracted from them even
though they don't produce anything, it is a dangerous category error
which serves to entrench a highly inequitable system.

By way of illustration, suppose some corporate profits are currently
being booked in a tax haven because that is where some "big data"
regarding consumer preferences in a rich country resides, and the
arm's-length principle attaches value to that data by virtue of its role
in profitability. Suppose now that that offshore space is to be
abolished -- to which jurisdiction should the profits be allocated for
tax purposes? The jurisdiction where the unpaid immaterial labour of
expressing a preference for the commodities is performed, or the
jurisdictions where people work in conditions of hyper-exploitation on
the farms and in the factories and down the mines where the commodities
are actually produced?

(4) Oh Jeremy Corbyn
--------------------

It is fundamental to Marx's critique of capitalism that even if a
distributional settlement emanates from relations formed under the
conditions of formal equality delivered by the rule of law, such a
settlement may still be arbitrary. "Between equal rights", he famously
wrote in *Capital*, "force decides". It is easy for us on the left to
dismiss on that basis the claim that some tax-privileged return or
another is "legal", or that there are "legitimate reasons" to be
offshore, but the argument is equally undermining to the proposition
that the underlying corporate profits were legitimately obtained, or
that the UK's potential claim to tax the returns on the assets is
legitimate.

In the context, Marx was referring to the fact that a greater or lesser
degree of appropriation of surplus value takes place through the wage
relation, notwithstanding formal equality in the formation of contracts
between labour and capital. As I have argued here, ultimately that
continues to be the core fault-line in capitalism, even if the
fault-line seems to have sheared a great distance because the relations
in practice are extremely complex, with the labour and the capital
operating in different jurisdictions and connected only by the writhing
indeterminacy of global value chains.

This presents a huge challenge of principle to purportedly social
democratic policy-making in rich countries. We hear a lot from the
forthcoming Labour government about how they are going to fund
investment here in the UK by stamping out tax avoidance, but nothing
about the global redistribution that will be necessary in order to stamp
out the underlying inequalities between the people who do the work
producing the stuff we consume and we who consume it.

Will Corbyn and McDonnell raise the rate of corporation tax and repeal
obvious giveaways to capital in our tax code? It is reasonable to hope
that they will. Will they repeal obscure neocolonial features of our tax
code that make it easier for UK companies to suck value from poor
countries? Perhaps they will get round to this if we in tax justice make
enough noise about it. But will they promulgate some kind of fundamental
readjustment to global tax norms such that taxing rights over corporate
profits are allocated to where the value is *really* created?

This would mean a concerted multilateral effort among rich countries to
break up the juridical spaces where capital accumulates untaxed and,
rather than necessarily bringing the fiscal proceeds home to places like
the UK to repair the savage vandalism perpetrated here by neoliberal
elites, instead allocating the fiscal proceeds between countries by
reference to some sort of metric based on the need for social, economic
and environmental justice globally. Realistically, I doubt that this is
in prospect; the Corbyn/McDonnell project will, at least to a certain
extent, rely on domestic economic growth and revenues from taxation in
the ordinary way.

It is also not in prospect because it would seem to be a geopolitical
impossibility, and this is reflective of what I fear may be the undoing
of the present coalition between the radical left and the social
democratic left in the UK: the inability of a Corbyn government to
address the neocolonial position of the UK in the capitalist world order
-- a position of which the Queen's holdings of offshore assets is at the
very least emblematic, however "legitimate" her reasons may be for their
existence.
