Technological Development For The Many
======================================

**[Wendy Liu](https://twitter.com/dellsystem)**

*To understand the potential benefits and challenges of technological
change, we have to critically consider the wider economic and political
context in which technological development takes place. Unleashing the
emancipatory potential of technology requires challenging the dominant
narrative around how technology should be owned and deployed.*

*This talk was originally delivered at the technology breakout session
of John McDonnell's State of the Economy conference at Imperial College
on May 19, 2018. The session was moderated by Peter Dodd MP and also
featured talks by Natasha Thomas, Director of Government Relations at
Sage, and Francesca Bria, founder of the Decode Project.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

What I want to do with my talk today is really push back against some
common narratives around technology, as a bit of a counterpoint to the
previous speech. I’ll be focusing on Silicon Valley, not just as the
geographic region but as a metonym for this pantheon of high-tech
companies, mostly in the US, that have gone from tiny startups running
out of dorm rooms to occupying key roles in the global economy in recent
years. I’m referring to public companies like Facebook, Amazon, and
Alphabet formerly known as Google, as well as companies that are still
private but have had major impacts on the real world, like Uber,
Deliveroo, and Airbnb.

I want to talk about how these companies were able to acquire such
massive amounts of wealth and influence in such a short period of time,
and what that tells us about the present economic and political
landscape. Specifically, I want to talk about two competing
explanations. Because when we’re dealing with an industry that feels so
shiny and new, most of us can really only understand it in terms of a
narrative. Some sort of story that we tell ourselves about the
increasing economic dominance of these corporations as well as the space
that technology entrepreneurs occupy in our collective imaginations. A
story to explain what’s happening and make it seem legitimate.

And this story goes something like this. We’re in the dawn of a new age
of innovation, the “second machine age”, where the ability to create
wealth is available to more people than ever before. Anyone who learns
how to code can start a tech company or at least get a six-figure salary
as a software engineer. Technology has levelled the playing field while
simultaneously unleashing profound and unprecedented innovation. In the
last decade alone, we’ve seen the rise of so many technology startups,
able to generate enormous amounts of wealth in record time. And as a
result of their hard work and bold visions, they’re able to disrupt
entire industries, squeezing out the less efficient competition.

We’ve seen the rise of the gig and sharing economies. Uber and Deliveroo
provide today’s working class with the ability to diversify their
sources of income, giving them the flexibility needed to pursue their
dreams. Airbnb uses technology to enable a more efficient allocation of
resources, fostering a new community spirit in the process. We’ve also
seen the growth of platforms for digital content like Spotify and
Netflix, giving us access to culture in exchange for a low monthly fee.

And we should be celebrating all this. We should embrace the fact that
the tech industry has massively boosted productivity. It’s fine that
people like Jeff Bezos, Mark Zuckerberg, Elon Musk have accumulated so
much wealth—after all, they’ve created a lot of jobs, and they deserve
to be rewarded for that. The fact so many of these entrepreneurs are
based in the US and white and male is a problem, but we can fix that by
encouraging women and minorities to go into STEM and start their own
companies. Here in the UK, we need to invest in our own startup
ecosystem to rival what’s happening across the pond. We need to improve
digital education across the board; we need to fund more startups; and
we need to celebrate the figure of the technology entrepreneur. In
short, we need to grow the high-tech sector. That’s how you increase
social mobility, that’s how you give the nation [a pay
rise](https://quarterly.demos.co.uk/article/issue-13/digital-challenges/).

Of course, it’s not all positive: we should be concerned with the tech
giants, especially over privacy violations, their monopolistic
tendencies, and their failure to pay a fair amount of tax. We should be
worried about automation destroying jobs. And we should be concerned
about the lack of diversity within the tech industry. But still, on the
whole, the story of technological development is one of laudable
progress, and anyone who questions that is a Luddite who just doesn’t
understand.

This is the primary narrative that we’ve been hearing from most of the
media and political class for a while now. Of course, as soon as we
start to critically assess that narrative, it falls apart. But it’s
instructive, I think, to consider where that narrative comes from and
whose interest it serves.

And I think the best way to understand the problems with this narrative
is to look at who the Luddites actually were. It’s a shame that for
many, Luddite has become synonymous with “hatred of technology” because
that obscures some important dimensions of what they were actually
trying to do. It wasn’t just about destroying machines because they were
afraid of them or didn’t understand them. The Luddites understood all
too well that the aim behind introducing machines was to disempower the
working class, to weaken workers’ ability to reap the rewards of their
labour. It was not about technology per se; it was about power.

And I think that insight is key to understanding the story of technology
today. We need to look at technological development from a much broader
and structural perspective, considering its historical role in a
capitalist framework as well as its effects on the relationship between
capital and labour. Any perspective that doesn’t take that into account
is ultimately misguided, serving to entrench the status quo.

Because here’s the real story about what this new wave of technological
innovation is all about. Underlying all the talk about efficiency and
making the world a better place, it really comes down to power.
Concentrating economic, social, political power among a select few and
entrenching that power, in a way that’s consistent with rising
inequality and precarity for everyone else. Structurally, technology’s
primary role in a capitalist system is to increase returns to capital
while at the same time disempowering labour, and we can’t forget it. All
this rhetoric around innovation is effectively just a way to mask
exploitation, a way to conceal what’s actually happening.

And what’s really going on in tech is similar to what’s been going on
elsewhere in the economy. Even though state investment is responsible
for quite a lot of technological development in recent years, the
prevailing neoliberal consensus means that it is overwhelmingly the
private sector that controls, and profits from them. What’s special
about tech is the way it has become this sort of collective fantasy, one
that benefits a select few at the top. There’s this idea that the tech
sector can absorb an infinite amount of surplus capital, that there will
be enough successes to make up for all the failures.

And so the money keeps flowing, creating an ecosystem of startups with
inflated valuations based on little more than a nice slide deck and some
wishful thinking. Founders who [look like Mark
Zuckerberg](http://www.paulgraham.com/tricked.html) can raise millions
to fund their derivative ideas for a more efficient way to sell
customers’ data. And even if they fail to find a sustainable business
model, and end up burning all that cash, they'll just start a new
company. At the same time, multinational tech firms with billions in
profits are doing everything they can to avoid paying taxes, and are
browbeating cities into giving them [further
concessions](https://qz.com/1194567/amazon-h2q-tax-breaks-may-endanger-cities-essential-services/)
in exchanging for creating jobs. Meanwhile, across most of the advanced
economies we’re seeing rising inequality and worsening living standards
for most.

These things are all linked—not directly, but as manifestations of
deeper problems with how the economy is organised. And if we want to
address them, we can’t just double down on technology and hope that some
enterprising founder will fix things. The structural incentives of the
startup ecosystem mean that the ideas that get funded are, by and large,
the ones that have a shot at making a lot of money, most likely at the
expense of our collective well-being. We need to take a step back, and
critically evaluate the narrative that has gotten us to this point. And
we need to change it. Because once you change the narrative, you change
what seems feasible. You open up new avenues of possibility.

And what we have to remember is that the very existence of these
companies comes down to enclosure of the commons. Only this time it’s
not land, it’s a digital commons. Corporations are selling us the right
to be connected to the internet, they’re selling us access to cultural
goods, they’re selling other corporations the ability to command our
attention through advertising. Technology is mediating the slow creep of
the private sector into more and more of our lives. At some point we
have to ask ourselves if this is really the world if we want, or if we
can imagine a better one.

I don’t have all the answers. I think we’re still at the beginnings of a
discussion of what a socialist approach to technology should look like.
What I do know is that we can’t consider technology in a vacuum, as some
sort of natural force disconnected from the larger social context.

The challenges that technological development will present over the
coming years are massive, but at the same time, we have an opportunity
to fundamentally rethink how the economy should be organised. We have
the chance to imagine an entirely different world, one where technology
is under democratic control and deployed for public good instead of
private profit.

Now this won’t be easy, coming up as it does against deeply ingrained
assumptions of our economic system that have been magnified by several
decades of neoliberalism. But I believe it’s the only way to ensure that
technology serves the many, not the few.

Further reading
---------------

-   [Evgeny Morozov](https://twitter.com/evgenymorozov) for New Left
    Review: [Socialize the Data
    Centres!](https://newleftreview.org/II/91/evgeny-morozov-socialize-the-data-centres)
-   [Felix Holtwell](https://twitter.com/AutomatedFully) for New
    Socialist: [Is automation really such a
    threat?](https://newsocialist.org.uk/is-automation-really-such-a-threat/)
-   [Justin Reynolds](https://twitter.com/justinlucent) for New
    Socialist: [Building Platform Socialism: Beyond the Taylor
    Review](https://newsocialist.org.uk//building-platform-socialism-beyond-the-taylor-review/)
-   [Grace Blakeley](https://twitter.com/graceblakeley) for Novara
    Media: [Robots Aren’t Coming for Our Jobs – Capitalists
    Are](http://novaramedia.com/2018/03/20/robots-arent-coming-for-our-jobs-capitalists-are/)
-   [Hettie O'Brien](https://twitter.com/hettieveronica) for New
    Socialist: [Monopoly's
    Fallacy](https://newsocialist.org.uk//monopolys-fallacy/)
-   [Mariana Mazzucato](https://twitter.com/MazzucatoM)'s book [The
    Entrepreneurial
    State](https://www.penguin.co.uk/articles/features/2018/apr/mariana-mazzucato-entreprenuerial-state/)
-   [Moira Weigel](https://twitter.com/moiragweigel) and [Ben
    Tarnoff](https://twitter.com/bentarnoff) for The Guardian: [Why
    Silicon Valley can’t fix
    itself](https://www.theguardian.com/news/2018/may/03/why-silicon-valley-cant-fix-itself-tech-humanism)
-   Wendy Liu for New Socialist:
    -   [Labour's New Economics Conference: Part Two, Digital
        Session](https://newsocialist.org.uk//labours-new-economics-conference-part-two-digital-session/)
    -   [Labour's Digital Strategy Is a Missed
        Opportunity](https://newsocialist.org.uk//labours-digital-strategy/)
    -   [The Inevitability of the Gig
        Economy](https://newsocialist.org.uk//the-gig-economy/)
-   [Peter Frase](https://twitter.com/pefrase) for Jacobin: [Ours to
    Master](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/03/automation-frase-robots)
-   The [Technology and the
    Worker](http://www.notesfrombelow.org/issue/technology-and-the-worker)
    issue of Notes From Below
-   Tony Smith for Jacobin: [Red
    Innovation](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/03/socialism-innovation-capitalism-smith)

