Universal Basic Services Won't Fix Our Economy
==============================================

**[Grace Blakeley](https://twitter.com/graceblakeley)**

Over the last few years, excitement about the idea of ‘universal basic
income’ (UBI) has reached a fever pitch. UBI – an unconditional payment
from the state to all or the majority of a country’s citizens – is
touted as the solution to all of modern capitalism’s problems. With the
prospect of mass unemployment resulting from rapid improvements in
labour-saving and labour-replacing technologies on the horizon, a
universal payment of some kind has been proposed by everyone from
libertarians to communists, and many in between. UBI has become that
rare [cross-ideological
idea](http://blogs.bath.ac.uk/iprblog/2017/01/23/basic-income-beyond-left-and-right/),
capturing the imagination of those on the right who acknowledge the
economic challenges ahead as well as those on the left who support a
fairer distribution of income.

Predictably, the response from some quarters has been to praise the idea
but lament that it is unaffordable and therefore unworkable. Some
[recent
analysis](http://www.bath.ac.uk/publications/assessing-the-case-for-a-universal-basic-income-in-the-uk/attachments/basic_income_policy_brief.pdf)
of the likely cost of even a minimal UBI in modern Britain has found
that it would cost almost £150bn extra per year. Even the complete
dismantling of the welfare state, which some libertarians would argue
for, would not be enough to pay for a full UBI.

In response to this issue, a number of other proposals have been put
forward. Negative taxation would involve a similar principle, but the
payment would be part of the income tax system, with the result that
only those below a certain income threshold would receive any money.
Others have argued that the current system of Universal Credit — broken
and poverty-inducing as it is — represents an opportunity to provide
genuinely universal and non-means-tested benefits to a significant
portion of the population.

Another proposed alternative to UBI comes from the UCL Institute for
Global Prosperity, which recently released a
[report](https://www.ucl.ac.uk/bartlett/igp/news/2017/oct/igps-social-prosperity-network-publishes-uks-first-report-universal-basic-services)
outlining a fiscally-neutral proposal for ‘Universal Basic Services’
(UBS). This would involve the extension of the ‘NHS principle’ to cover
housing, food, transport, and IT to counter the threat posed by
automation. UCL argues that this would ‘raise the floor’ of basic
services all citizens can expect and ensure that these services are free
at the point of use. The proposal is framed as an ‘affordable
alternative’ to UBI.

Transformative or affirmative?
------------------------------

Many on the left are
[sceptical](https://jacobinmag.com/2017/12/universal-basic-income-inequality-work)
about UBI. This is not because they don’t believe people should be paid
enough to survive regardless of whether they can find productive
employment. The main criticism of UBI from the left is that it would not
be as transformative as some proselytisers suggest: although UBI tackles
the consumption side, key questions around ownership of the means of
production are left unaddressed. Whether or not it’s ‘affordable’ should
be a secondary consideration; without fundamental structural reforms to
our economic system, UBI will only be a sticking plaster papering over
the cracks.

Many of the left’s challenges to UBI can also be applied to UBS. The
primary advantage of UBS over UBI is its push for decommodification: by
providing high-quality public services that are free at the point of
use, UBS would shelter citizens from the vagaries of the market whereas
UBI would leave them more exposed. On the other hand, that's hardly
*enough*. It's hard to argue against the aim of universal basic services
– clearly, public services that allow people to survive with a certain
level of dignity are a good thing – but the first thing that comes to
mind when you read the report is, ‘Shouldn’t we be doing this anyway?’

The 'affordability' trap
------------------------

What's more, because they attempt to solve the red herring of
‘affordability’, the proposals for UBS turn out to be quite
objectionable. Taking a closer look at the details reveals that these
services are far from universal. To benefit from the maximum value of
the scheme, a household would need to qualify for the housing element,
and only 1.5 million households would be eligible. For the vast majority
of other recipients, [the RSA
finds](https://www.thersa.org/discover/publications-and-articles/rsa-blogs/2017/10/universal-basic-services-or-universal-basic-income)
that the proposals would provide a mere £39 per week of extra value. For
those who don’t live in a city, and therefore don’t stand to benefit
from the transport investments, this falls to just £18 per week.

These meagre proposals undoubtedly result from the warped insistence on
‘fiscal neutrality’. The idea that current levels of public spending are
desirable, after a decade of some of the deepest cuts ever witnessed in
a modern state, is ludicrous. We should not shy away from increasing
public spending to finance an initiative that is both an investment in
human capital and a massive macroeconomic intervention that would boost
private spending power. What's more, the concept of ‘affordability’ is
very elastic for an established sovereign state in control of its own
monetary policy.

Emphasising fiscal neutrality plays into the hands of those who insisted
on implementing austerity in the first place. Austerity was never about
‘paying down the public debt’. This debt resulted from the decision to
bail out the banks after the financial crisis, not the profligacy of an
overly generous democratic state. And in any case, it is impossible to
reduce levels of public debt through spending cuts without substantial
investments in the long-term productive potential of the economy. This
is why, ten years after the crash, the UK’s public debt is still rising.

![Debt compared to GDP over
time](https://newsocialist.org.uk/media/images/Screenshot-from-2018-02-07-12-02-28.png)

Have we really given over so much intellectual ground to the last
decade's failed austerity narrative that we now need to put forward a
rebranded argument for basic, life-sustaining, worker-supporting public
services?

Were it not for the ideological retrenchment that has taken place over
the last thirty years, any sensible economist or politician would have
argued that basic provisions for health, housing, food, and transport
were not only moral imperatives, but economic necessities in a society
that relies on human capital as its primary factor of production. People
who can’t eat, or sleep, or access healthcare can’t work in the places
that neoliberals suggest create so much of our economic value.

And this is what we are starting to see after a decade of austerity.
Employment is the highest it has ever been, but [wages have
stagnated](https://www.ippr.org/files/2017-09/cej-interim-report.pdf),
and private debt levels are [approaching pre-crisis
levels](https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/sep/18/uk-debt-crisis-credit-cards-car-loans).
As a result, [child
poverty](https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/mar/16/child-poverty-in-uk-at-highest-level-since-2010-official-figures-show)
is at its highest level since 2010 and [one in every 200
people](https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/nov/08/one-in-every-200-people-in-uk-are-homeless-according-to-shelter)
in the UK is now homeless. Moreover, the basic goods and services we
would require to alleviate these problems – from our NHS, to children’s
services, to social housing – have been eviscerated. What we are left
with is not only a broken society, but a broken economy too.

Beyond UBS
----------

Clearly, growing our economy will require massive increases in
investment in our public services. But any worthwhile implementation
would have to be more substantial than what was proposed in UCL’s
report. The provision of public services is a basic requirement for any
modern economy. Rebranding these fundamental services as a gimmicky
‘nice to have’ like UBS risks ceding more ground to those who
eviscerated our public services in the first place.

What we need now is not a technocratic, fiscally neutral argument for
‘universal basic services’. Instead, we need to expose the moral and
logical vacuum at the heart of the austerity narrative, and tackle the
underlying issues that have created such huge disparities of wealth in
the first place. To truly make the UK’s economy fit for the 21st
century, wealth must be socialised, models of ownership radically
rethought, and power redistributed away from capital and towards labour.
